Call for Critical and Speculative Design in Human-Computer Co-creativity: An
Overview Study
Hugh Xuechen LIU
School of Creative Media
City University of Hong Kong
Hong Kong, SAR, China
hugh.liu@my.cityu.edu.hk
Yuxuan HUANG
School of Creative Media
City University of Hong Kong
Hong Kong, SAR, China
yhuang573-c@my.cityu.edu.hk
Jussi Pekka HOLOPAINEN
School of Creative Media
City University of Hong Kong
Hong Kong, SAR, China
jholopai@cityu.edu.hk
Abstract
The recent boom of artificial intelligence (AI) and machine
learning (ML) has demonstrated their potential to impact
human-computer interaction (HCI) in general and human-
computer co-creativity in particular. Therefore, we want to
provide a systematic literature overview of computational co-
creativity research so far. In total, 916 articles from Sco-
pus and Web of Science databases were pulled. Bibliometric
analysis of their abstracts and a Latent Dirichlet Allocation
(LDA) topic modeling on their full text was conducted to re-
veal what is covered in the previous academic discussions on
human-computer co-creativity. The results of these analyses
demonstrate that current research mostly focuses on technol-
ogy, overlooking the role of design. Accordingly, we call
for more design-oriented research to develop a more com-
prehensive understanding of human-computer co-creativity,
especially from critical and speculative design perspectives.
Keywords: computational co-creativity; human-computer in-
teraction; co-creativity; critical design; speculative design;
overview study
Introduction
Artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) tech-
nologies have been part of human-computer interaction re-
search for a long time. Although AI and ML have been
frequently used in productivity fields (e.g., auto driving),
they have recently demonstrated their capability in creativ-
ity thanks to the iteratively optimized algorithms.
This
newly enabled creativity is, in fact, co-creativity as it is a
collaboration between human and computational technolo-
gies. This evolution gives rise to the current massive in-
terest in generative AI. For example, ChatGPT, made by
OpenAI, can generate articles and essays that look as if
written by human beings.
The performance of ChatGPT
was so good that students used it for cheating with their
assignments, which seemed to threaten academic honesty
(Mitchell, 2022). Other computational co-creativity tools
can provide users with automatically generated illustrations
based on simple text input (Ma et al., 2022). The adoption
of these generative AI technologies into other creative activ-
ities seems unstoppable.
Current applications of computational co-creativity (i.e.,
text and graphic illustrations) are mainly for non-interactive
media. Typical use cases include photobashing, text gener-
ators, bots, and hypertext fiction tools (Ryan et al., 2018).
In interactive media, there are cases using them to create
content for text-based adventure games1, develop massively
multiplayer online games (Goncharenko, 2022), and stream-
line video game development processes (P´erez, 2022). Con-
sidering the recent advancement in generative AI and other
computational technology in the field of creativity, it is
high time for the academic community to have a reflective
overview of the human-computer co-creativity relationship.
Therefore, we investigate the existing human-computer co-
creativity academic research to answer the following ques-
tions:
• What are the well-defined research directions in terms of
human-computer co-creativity?
• Specifically, what’s the role of design in current research?
Methodology
We use a systematic literature review to answer the research
questions. Following existing guidelines for systematic lit-
erature reviews (Kitchenham, 2004), we will perform biblio-
metric analysis and Latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) topic
modelling. The review is planned, conducted, and reported
sequentially.
Data Collection
We collect data by selecting the search strings, the sources to
search for, and determining inclusion and exclusion criteria.
It is recommended to search academic research publications,
archives of magazines and newspapers, and practitioner pub-
lications to generate the first versions of keywords related to
the topic (Rowley and Slack, 2004). Accordingly, the search
keywords are conceptualized to include previous studies on
computational co-creativity.
The main interest of this study is perspectives on human-
machine interaction that have appeared in previous litera-
ture. Meanwhile, these perspectives are used to examine re-
cent computational co-creativity topics. A keyword matrix
is created to indicate how each search is to be conducted by
pairing each perspective and topic (e.g., ”computer-human
interaction” and ”co-creativity”).
Keywords for our cho-
sen perspective include computer human interaction, human
computer interaction, human machine, human-in-the-loop,
1https://aidungeon.io/
Figure 1: Keyword Matrix and Number of Results, Web of
Science
Figure 2: Keyword Matrix and Number of Results, Scopus
mixed-initiative, user interface, interaction design, and cre-
ative interface. Keywords of topics include co-creativity,
computational creativity, generative creativity, co-creation,
generative art, and generative artificial intelligence. These
keywords may sound arbitrary, but they emerge from the re-
search questions and are grounded in the recently popular
and academic discussions on computational co-creativity.
After defining the search keywords, we need to determine
the data source to continue. We chose Web of Science and
Scopus since they are the most used academic databases
with high credibility (Meho and Yang, 2007). In the Web
of Science, each keyword pair is used to search for the ”top-
ics” (i.e., titles, abstracts, author keywords, and Keywords
Plus.). In Scopus, each keyword pair is used to search for ar-
ticles whose titles, abstracts, or keywords match. The Web
of Science search returned 1089 records. Figure 1 shows
the number of results each pair of keywords returned. Af-
ter removing the duplication among each keyword pair, 685
records were left. The Scopus returned 3064 records. Figure
2 demonstrates the number of results from each pair of key-
words. 1724 records were left after combining and removing
the duplication of results from each keyword pair.
Records from Web of Science and Scopus were merged,
and the duplications were removed using Endnote, a refer-
ence library management software. This resulted with 2120
records left. These records went through manual duplication
Table 1: Filtering Criteria
Inclusion
Criteria
I1
The publication is an empirical, technical,
or theoretical article.
I2
The publication covers aspects of identi-
fied perspectives and fields of computa-
tional co-creativity.
Exclusion
Criteria
E1
The publication is a technical manual de-
tailing specific technologies.
E2
Identified perspectives and fields of com-
putational co-creativity are merely men-
tioned.
E3
The publication does not involve a co-
creation or interaction relationship.
E4
The co-creation or interaction in the publi-
cation doesn’t involve a machine (e.g., the
co-creation only happens between human
agents in marketing, tourism or public pol-
icy).
removal and were shortlisted with filtering criteria shown in
Table 1.
For filtering, each of the authors screened the first 50
records independently and compared the results with each
other. This ensured that all authors shared a mutually agreed
understanding of the filtering criteria. Then, the remained
records were split into equal parts, and each author filtered
their part. The filtering resulted in 1009 records, 916 of them
with full-text PDFs available. These 916 full-text articles
were used for the analysis described below.
Data Analysis
This systematic literature review includes bibliometric anal-
ysis and topic modelling to process the collected data. De-
tails of each analysis are explained below.
Bibliometric Analysis
A bibliometric analysis involves
analyzing bibliometric data of publications (e.g., citations,
titles, and abstracts) quantitatively (Broadus, 1987).
The
purpose is to mine out the hidden information in academic
publications in a specific field (Linnenluecke, Marrone, and
Singh, 2020).
In recent years, bibliometric analysis has
gained popularity thanks to bibliometric software and scien-
tific databases (Donthu et al., 2021). The Bibliometrix pack-
age supported by R Programming Language is suggested
(Aria and Cuccurullo, 2017; Team, 2013) and it is applied in
various studies successfully (Lajeunesse, 2016; Liu, 2022).
Bibliometrix supports .bib files exported from both Web of
Science and Scopus, making it suitable for this study.
We will report bibliometric metrics (i.e., annual scientific
production, citation per year, trend topics, and concept co-
occurrence network). Annual scientific production and ci-
tation per year reveal how related publications and citations
appeared each year. Trend topics are expressions frequently
appearing in the abstracts of the shortlisted articles.
By
acknowledging the frequency distribution of each expres-
sion, the frequently mentioned historical topics and when
they mostly appeared will emerge. Each expression as an
analysis unit can be made of one single word (called uni-
gram), two consecutive words (called bigram), three consec-
utive words (called trigram) and so on. Considering popular
expressions of computational co-creativity (e.g., ”machine
learning”) is made up of two words, the abstracts of papers
are broken down and each unit is a bigram. A co-occurrence
relationship occurs when two units appear together in an ab-
stract. This way, abstracts from articles can be retrieved to
identify relationships between units. Units and relationships
are visualized as a ”co-occurrence network.” Each unit is
a ”node,” and each relationship is an ”edge.” The size of
the node corresponds to its frequency of co-occurrence. We
can find the most discussed concepts in the previous litera-
ture and their relationships using the co-occurrence network
analysis. Similar to trend topics, the concept co-occurrence
network is generated based on the abstracts of shortlisted pa-
pers using bigrams as units. To balance the simplicity and
the grasp of the most characteristic part of the co-occurrence
network, only the top 20 nodes are reported. Trend topics
and the concept co-occurrence network will show how the
focus of researchers in the computational co-creativity field
and how it has shifted over time.
The results of the bibliometric analysis provide pri-
mary insights into academic research on computational co-
creativity, but the analysis leaves out the specific content in
researches.
Because of a large number of articles in the
corpus, manual analysis methods such as thematic analy-
sis would have been too cumbersome (Braun and Clarke,
2012). Therefore, a topic modelling approach is incorpo-
rated to make this overview study more comprehensive.
Topic Modeling Using Latent Dirichlet Allocation(LDA)
Topic modelling is a statistical tool for extracting otherwise
hidden structures, and topics from large datasets and is par-
ticularly well suited for use with text data (Vayansky and
Kumar, 2020). A “topic” is a recurring word pattern that fre-
quently appears together. The topic modelling approach sees
every document as a combination of various latent topics
with different probabilities (Steyvers and Griffiths, 2007).
Through statistical techniques, it is possible to uncover these
hidden topics by analyzing the documents to reveal what
topics each document embodies and with what probabilities
(Barde and Bainwad, 2017). Since we aim to provide a com-
prehensive positioning of the existing academic publications
on computational co-creativity, topic modelling on the full
text of these publications can provide helpful insights.
Among several methods for topic modelling, we use “La-
tent Dirichlet Allocation” (LDA) as applied in natural lan-
guage processing by Blei, Ng, and Jordan (2003). LDA re-
gards documents as generated from randomized mixtures of
hidden topics, seen as probability distributions over words.
Such generation is assumed to be based on a Dirichlet prior
distribution (Vayansky and Kumar, 2020). LDA is one of the
earliest and more frequently utilized topic modelling meth-
ods.
It is a reliable approach and has been successfully
used in studies across various fields (e.g., social media, fi-
nance, and university teacher assessment) (Aziz et al., 2022;
Buena˜no-Fernandez et al., 2020; Geva, Oestreicher-Singer,
and Saar-Tsechansky, 2019). Therefore, we use LDA topic
modelling to analyze the full text of screened articles, reveal-
ing the hidden topics of computational co-creativity studies.
The Text Analytics Toolbox of MATLAB is utilized to con-
duct the LDA topic modelling.
A workflow of LDA modelling includes the following
phases: First, collect and import the raw data expected to
investigate. Second, clean the data through preprocessing
(e.g., tokenize the text, lemmatize the words, remove punc-
tuation, infrequent words, and remove stopwords). Third,
build the bag of words based on the cleaned data.
That
means breaking down the whole article or paragraphs into
smaller units for text. One can build the bag of words based
on one single unit or combined units. Fourth, build LDA
models. LDA modelling requires both the bag of words and
a priori selected number of topics as inputs. Fifth, choose
the model(s) with the most suitable number of topics for
more thorough interpretation and reporting.
In our case, the raw data is the full text of all the 916 ar-
ticles shortlisted. Five bags of words include three separate
ones (i.e., unigram, bigram and trigram). It is because these
three separate types of bags of words may cover most terms
in computational co-creativity (e.g., ”creativity”, ”machine
learning”, ”generative adversarial network”). In addition to
these three separate bag of words, we build two combined
ones. One is uni-bigram, the combination of unigram and
bigram. The other is uni-bi-trigram, the combination of un-
igram, bigram, and trigram. These combined bags of words
should be more meaningful representations of the published
articles (Kaur, Ghorpade, and Mane, 2017). Combined bags
of words are also recommended by some popular LDA mod-
elling packages (e.g., the python package ”Gensim” which
has been used in more than two thousand research papers
and student theses ( ˇReh˚uˇrek and Sojka, 2010)). Following
the best practice (Yue, Wang, and Hui, 2019), eight topic
numbers [5, 10, 15, ...., 40] are attempted. These topic num-
bers may seem arbitrary, but this choice avoids too general
emerging topics and allows reasonable manual screening of
emerging topics across the models. Therefore, 5 ∗ 8 = 40
models are built. Each model produces the following out-
puts: 1) The top 10 highest probability words of each topic
and visualized as the word cloud; 2) The top 10 papers that
have the highest probability in each topic (i.e., ”representa-
tive papers of each topic”); 3) Papers where one topic proba-
bility is the greater than any other topics’ probability; 4) The
probability of all topics in the whole dataset; 5) The mixture
of all topics’ probability in each paper. All the authors went
through, discussed and reflected on all of these outputs. We
choose models with the most meaningful and interpretable
topics for further analysis. Major results of them are re-
ported in the Findings section. The workflow of our LDA
modelling is summarized and visualized in Figure 3. Fig-
ure 4 below summarizes the workflow of the whole research
design.
Findings
Bibliometric Analysis
Figure 5 and Figure 6 show annual scientific production and
average citation-per-year for computational co-creativity.
Articles were few before the early 2000s, but surged in 2009
and have increased each year since. In 2021 and 2022, 129
Figure 3: Workflow of LDA modeling
Figure 4: Workflow of Research Design
and 136 annual publications were recorded. The release of
GPT-3 in 2021 may have encouraged research in computer-
generated content and computational co-creativity. Before
2011, only one paper on computational co-creativity was
cited each year on average, but afterwards, more was cited
every year. The year 2015 saw high citation numbers, possi-
bly due to the introduction of GAN (Goodfellow et al., 2014)
and a paper from Google discussing a neural image caption
generator (Vinyals et al., 2015). The increase in publication
and citation of articles on computational co-creativity indi-
cates growing interest in the field.
The top 10 trend topics are visualized in Figure 7.
The most frequently appeared topic is “artificial intelli-
gence”, the enabling approach of much of computational co-
creativity. Following it lies “machine learning”, one specific
method to instantiate AI (K¨uhl et al., 2020). The following
topics, “generative adversarial”, ”deep learning”, “adversar-
ial networks”, ”neural networks” and “generative models,”
can be put into one category, namely generative adversarial
networks (GANs).These topics are relatively new, as they
reached their one-quarter frequency of appearance in 2019.
Topics left belong to a group that emphasizes the role
of creativity, such as “computational creativity,” “human-
computer interaction”, and “human creativity”. In contrast
to GAN-related topics, these terms have fewer appearances
and reach their one-quarter frequency earlier.
Figure 5: Visualization of Annual Scientific Production
Figure
6:
Visualization
of
Citation
per
Year
(MeanTCperYear)
The concept co-occurrence network is visualized in Fig-
ure 8.
The concept network is almost totally dominated
by the cluster of technology, featuring ”artificial intelli-
gence”, ”machine learning,” and ”generative adversarial.”
Many nodes belong to this technology, most frequently ap-
pearing in the papers’ abstracts. On top of that, there are
diversified and frequent co-occurrence relationships among
these nodes.
Therefore, the cluster of computational co-
creativity technology concepts has formed a complex and
robust network. In contrast, there is only one different clus-
ter in the whole network: ”human creativity” and ”compu-
tational creativity.” This cluster of creativity has much fewer
nodes and edges. Each node has fewer frequency of co-
occurrence. This cluster of creativity is a simple and fragile
network.
To sum up, the bibliometric analysis demonstrates that
computational co-creativity has become a popular research
field in recent years and decades. Not only are people inter-
ested in doing research about it, but people also like read-
ing and citing these papers. However, the current research
on computational co-creativity is heavily technology-
oriented, specifically focusing on the generative adver-
sarial networks. ”Creativity” does have a place, but it’s al-
most dominated by technology. These are the primary find-
ings from the bibliometric analysis of the abstracts of papers.
Figure 7: Top 10 Trend Topics
Figure 8: Concept Co-occurrence network.
Topic Modeling Using Latent Dirichlet
Allocation(LDA)
Overview Findings
As mentioned earlier, 40 LDA mod-
els are trained in this study, covering 5 bags of words and
8 topic numbers. Due to space limitations, we will elabo-
rate on only three representative models based on the bag
of words of combined unigrams and bigrams. Readers are
welcome to contact the authors if interested in all the re-
sults. These three models are selected as a tradeoff between
specificity and interpretability compared to other models.
They are the ”Uni-bigram, 10 Topics” model (Model A), the
”Uni-bigram, 15 Topics” model (Model B), and the ”Uni-
bigram, 20 Topics” model (Model C). The overview of the
three models is presented in the word cloud figures in Fig-
ure 9. In all three models, ”technology” (and a related term
”technique”) has appeared in the topic to which most papers
belong. It appeared in four topics among the three mod-
els. Considering the enabling role of technology in compu-
tational co-creativity, it is totally understandable. However,
the most frequent appearance of ”technology” strongly indi-
cates that the current research in computational co-creativity
is highly technology-oriented.
Another thing is ”design”
(and ”designer”) also appeared in three models. Among the
three models, ”design” has appeared in four topics. This in-
dicates that ”design” emerges as an important theme in com-
putational co-creativity literature. Nevertheless, ”design” is
highly related to terms ”tool” (Topic 8 of Model A; Topic
13 of Model B; Topic 16 of Model C) and ”system” (Topic
5 of Model B; Topic 16 of Model C). Therefore, the design
mentioned in previous computational literature is probably
from a mainly instrumental perspective. In order to clarify
his issue, we do a further analysis of papers related to design
topic in the investigated LDA models.
We also perform a more thorough interpretation of one
of the three models. This topic interpretation entails go-
ing through the topic representations of the model, i.e., top
keywords and their probabilities, word cloud visualization,
top representative papers, overall topic probability distribu-
tion, and visualization of topic distributions of individual pa-
pers. This helps to specify the ‘core’ meaning of the topic.
Next, the topic is given a short description and references
to two most representative papers on the topic. The results
for one of the models (the ”Uni-bigram, 15 Topics” model
(Model B)) are shown in Table 2 below. This one is chosen
because 15 is an appropriate number of topics, again, bal-
ancing specificity and interpretability. Also, among all the
40 models we train, Model B results made most sense to the
authors.
Manual Analysis of Design Topic
Although not ade-
quately embodied in the abstract of papers, the design
emerges as an important topic in all three uni-bigram LDA
models built on the full text of computational co-creativity
papers. In fact, design as a topic was present in all the 40
models we investigate. Further manual analysis of titles and
abstracts of papers with “design” as their main topic (100
papers) revealed that they fall into five categories: design
and/or evaluation of a specific computational co-creativity
application, e.g., (Kantosalo and Riihiaho, 2019; Calder-
wood et al., 2020); reviews of existing research and sys-
tems e.g. (Mountstephens and Teo, 2020; Kapur and Ansari,
2022); design support tools e.g., (Nakakoji, Yamamoto, and
Ohira, 2000; Bonnardel and Marm`eche, 2005); general cre-
ativity research, e.g., (Edmonds et al., 2005; Algarni, 2020),
and three papers related to speculative or critical design
(Bardzell, Bardzell, and Koefoed Hansen, 2015; Reddy,
2022; Liikkanen, 2019).
Among the three papers related to critical or speculative
design, (Liikkanen, 2019) is a short paper not discussing
critical or speculative design per se but rather encouraging
HCI researchers to pay more attention to how generative AI
will challenge and change the interaction design profession.
(Reddy, 2022) outlines a ‘critical making’ practice in ex-
ploring AI and human collaborative creativity. (Bardzell,
Bardzell, and Koefoed Hansen, 2015) is a generic call for en-
gaging with more critical ways of creating knowledge within
research through design HCI research.
In summary, al-
though these three papers are related to speculative and criti-
cal design, only (Reddy, 2022) specifically focuses on com-
putational co-creativity. This seems to indicate that these
approaches are underrepresented in the research field.
We conduct additional Scopus and Web of Science (WoS)
inquiries to investigate this argument further. Searching key-
words are used to screen articles whose title, abstract or key-
word match. Table 3 shows the result.
In addition to (Reddy, 2022) and (Liikkanen, 2019) men-
tioned above, (Brassett, 2016) discusses design and specu-
Table 2: Topic Interpretation and Representative Papers in Model B
Topic No.
Interpretation
Representative Papers
1
music composition
and performance
1) Ting, C.-K.; Wu, C.-L.; and Liu, C.-H. 2015. A novel automatic composition system using evolutionary algorithm and phrase imitation.
IEEE Systems Journal 11(3):1284–1295. 2) Kirke, A., and Miranda, E. R. 2009. A survey of computer systems for expressive music
performance. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 42(1):1–41
2
overall
aspects
of
computational
co-creativity
1) Coeckelbergh, M. 2017. Can machines create art? Philosophy & Technology 30(3):285–303. 2) Kirke, A., and Miranda, E. R. 2009. A
survey of computer systems for expressive music performance. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 42(1):1–41
3
object, action, and
human recognition
1) Zhang, S.; Wei, Z.; Nie, J.; Huang, L.; Wang, S.; Li, Z.; et al. 2017. A review on human activity recognition using vision-based method.
Journal of healthcare engineering 2017. 2) Li, X.; Liu, S.; Kim, K.; Wang, X.; Yang, M.-H.; and Kautz, J. 2019. Putting humans in a
scene: Learning affordance in 3d indoor environments. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 12368–12376.
4
language and dia-
logue generation
1) Lee, P.; Fyffe, S.; Son, M.; Jia, Z.; and Yao, Z. 2022. A paradigm shift from human writing” to “machine generation” in personality test
development: an application of state-of-the-art natural language processing. Journal of Business and Psychology 1–28. 2) Belainine, B.;
Sadat, F.; and Boukadoum, M. 2022. End-to-end dialogue generation using a single encoder and a decoder cascade with a multidimension
attention mechanism.IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems.
5
design and design
processes
1) Dilibal, S.; Nohut, S.; Kurtoglu, C.; and Owusu-Danquah, J. 2021. Data-driven generative design integrated with hybrid additive
subtractive manufacturing (hasm) for smart cities. In Data-Driven Mining, Learning and Analytics for Secured Smart Cities: Trends and
Advances. Springer. 205–228. Mountstephens, 2) J., and Teo, J. 2020. Progress and challenges in generative product design: A review of
systems. Computers 9(4):80.
6
general artificial in-
telligence in creativ-
ity
1) Cerrito, C. D. 2010. Creating with cobots. In Proceedings of the fourth international conference on Tangible, embedded, and embodied
interaction, 395–396. 2) de Silva Garza, A. G., and Gero, J. S. 2010. Elementary social interactions and their effects on creativity: A
computational simulation. In ICCC, 110–119.
7
algorithms,
ar-
chitectures,
and
techniques
1) Habuza, T.; Navaz, A. N.; Hashim, F.; Alnajjar, F.; Zaki, N.; Serhani, M. A.; and Statsenko, Y. 2021. Ai applications in robotics,
diagnostic image analysis and precision medicine: Current limitations, future trends, guidelines on cad systems. 2) Chale, M., and Bastian,
N. D. 2022. Generating realistic cyber data for training and evaluating machine learning classifiers for network intrusion detection systems.
Expert Systems with Applications 207:117936.
8
procedural
content
generation
and
behavioural models
in games
1) Cutumisu, M.; Szafron, D.; Schaeffer, J.; Waugh, K.; Onuczko, C.; Siegel, J.; and Schumacher, A. 2006. A demonstration of scriptease
ambient and pc-interactive behavior generation for computer role-playing games. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence and Interactive Digital Entertainment, volume 2, 141–142. 2) Kumaran, V.; Mott, B.; and Lester, J. 2019. Generating game
levels for multiple distinct games with a common latent space. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
Interactive Digital Entertainment, volume 15, 102–108.
9
human-machine re-
lationships
in
co-
creativity
1) Griffith, A. E.; Katuka, G. A.; Wiggins, J. B.; Boyer, K. E.; Freeman, J.; Magerko, B.; and McKlin, T. 2022. Investigating the rela-
tionship between dialogue states and partner satisfaction during co-creative learning tasks. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence
in Education 1–40. 2) Sundararajan, L. 2014. Mind, machine, and creativity: an artist’s perspective. The Journal of creative behavior
48(2):136–151.
10
computational sup-
port for specific cre-
ative tasks
1) Watanabe, K.; Matsubayashi, Y.; Inui, K.; Nakano, T.; Fukayama, S.; and Goto, M. 2017. Lyrisys: An interactive support system for
writing lyrics based on topic transition. In Proceedings of the 22nd international conference on intelligent user interfaces, 559–56. 2)
Williams, H., and McOwan, P. W. 2014. Magic in the machine: a computational magician’s assistant. Frontiers in psychology 5:1283.
11
interactive
sto-
rytelling
and
co-creation
1) Bacher, J. T., and Martens, C. 2021. Interactive fiction creation in villanelle: Understanding and supporting the author experience. In
2021 IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages and Human-Centric Computing (VL/HCC), 1–5. IEEE. 2) Rico Garcia, O. D.; Fernandez
Fernandez, J.; Becerra Saldana, R. A.; and Witkowski, O. 2022. Emotion-driven interactive storytelling: Let me tell you how to feel.
In Artificial Intelligence in Music, Sound, Art and Design: 11th International Conference, EvoMUSART 2022, Held as Part of EvoStar
2022, Madrid, Spain, April 20–22, 2022, Proceedings, 259–274. Springer.
12
human
percep-
tual and cognitive
capabilities
in
computational
co-
creativity
1) Algarni, A. 2020. Neuroscience of creativity in human computer interaction. In Proceedings of the Future Technologies Conference
(FTC) 2019: Volume 1, 248–262. Springer. 2) Bonnardel, N., and Marm‘eche, E. 2005. Towards supporting evocation processes in
creative design: A cognitive approach. International journal of human-computer studies 63(4-5):422–435.
13
creative processes in
interaction design
1) Lee, Y.-C., and Llach, D. C. 2020. Hybrid embroidery: exploring interactive fabrication in handcrafts. In ACM SIG-GRAPH 2020
Art Gallery. 429–433. 2) Ryskeldiev, B.; Ili c, S.; Ochiai, Y.; Elliott, L.; Nikonole, H.; and Billinghurst, M. 2021. Creative immersive
ai: Emerging challenges and opportunities forcreative applications of ai in immersive media. In Extended Abstracts of the 2021 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 1–3.
14
adversarial
net-
works for visual and
spatial tasks
1) Han, X.; Yang, H.; Xing, G.; and Liu, Y. 2019. Asymmetric joint gans for normalizing face illumination from a single image. IEEE
Transactions on Multimedia 22(6):1619–1633. 2) Pang, Y.; Xie, J.; and Li, X. 2018. Visual haze removal by a unified generative
adversarial network. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology 29(11):3211–3221.
15
artificial
intelli-
gence and machine
learning
in
drug
discovery
1) Choudhury, C.; Murugan, N. A.; and Priyakumar, U. D. 2022. Structure-based drug repurposing: Traditional and advanced ai/ml-aided
methods. Drug Discovery Today. 2) Bilodeau, C.; Jin, W.; Jaakkola, T.; Barzilay, R.; and Jensen, K. F. 2022. Generative models for
molecular discovery: Recent advances and challenges. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Computational Molecular Science 12(5):e1608.
(a) 10 Topic Model Word Cloud
(b) 15 Topic Model Word Cloud
(c) 20 Topic Model Word Cloud
Figure 9: Word Cloud Figure of Three Uni-bigram LDA
Models
Table 3: Inquiry of Critical Design and Speculative Design
in Computational Co-creativity publications
Search Keywords
Source
Number of
Results
Related Articles
computational
AND
creativity
AND speculative
AND design
Scopus
5
(Brassett, 2016)
WoS
5
(Brassett, 2016)
computational
AND
creativity
AND
critical
AND design
Scopus
60
(Reddy, 2022)
WoS
55
(Reddy, 2022)
generative
AND
ai
AND
spec-
ulative
AND
design
Scopus
4
(Wood, 2021)
WoS
3
N/A
generative
AND
ai
AND
critical
AND design
Scopus
19
(Wood,
2021;
Reddy,
2022;
Liikkanen, 2019)
WoS
37
(Reddy,
2022;
Liikkanen, 2019)
lation through a philosophical approach, incorporating in-
terpretations of Simondon, Deleuze, Guattari, and Spinoza.
(Wood, 2021) describes ‘poetic methods’ as an approach in-
spired by speculative and critical design. Poetic methods in-
clude installation, encounters, and performances developed
in a participatory manner with public engagement.
This
opens up ways for more discursive, open-ended, and future-
oriented ways of understanding how technologies affect our
lives.
As Web of Science and Scopus do not necessarily have a
wide enough cover, we also conduct a brief Google Scholar
Search with the same keywords. Even this search returned
only a handful of relevant publications, all recent (Ullstein
and Hohendanner, 2020; Buschek et al., 2021; Houde et al.,
2020; Jang and Nam, 2022; Muller et al., 2022).
The results of bibliometric analyses, LDA modelling,
and further manual literature review show that the current
computational co-creativity research is heavily technology-
oriented, specifically leaning on the generative adversarial
network approach. In contrast, the role of design in the pa-
pers either focuses on applications of certain technologies or
overlooks other design elements.
Discussion
Based on the bibliometric analysis and LDA modelling re-
sults, we can respond to the two research questions proposed
in the introduction section:
• What are the well-defined research directions in terms
of human-computer co-creativity? Current research di-
rections of human-computer co-creativity mostly fall in
the category of technology, especially generative adver-
sarial networks and other broader directions (e.g., deep
learning, neural network, machine learning, and artificial
intelligence).
• Specifically, what’s the role of design in current re-
search? There are four points: 1) Design indeed appeared
in multiple topics, so it’s not absent; 2) Compared with
technology, design takes much less portion in the exist-
ing computational co-creativity research; 3) The current
discussion of design is also highly technology-oriented;
4) Speculative and critical design approaches are rare in
computational co-creativity and generative AI.
Current technology-focused research on computational
co-creativity is based on implicit value, motivation and ori-
entation in their given designs. At the same time, a lack of
critical reflection and alternative future exploration in com-
putational co-creativity and generative AI is embodied by
the insufficient discussion on the design itself. Such a lack
may narrow our horizons and shrink the possibility of spaces
where computational co-creativity could have been. In this
way, such a lack will prevent us from a comprehensive un-
derstanding of computational co-creativity and generative
AI, which will endanger this field’s long-term development.
We propose research through speculative and critical
interaction design as a worthwhile approach to pursue fur-
ther. In research through design (RtD), actual artifacts are
designed and made to respond to specific research ques-
tions (see, e.g., (Zimmerman, Forlizzi, and Evenson, 2007)).
Speculative design (Auger, 2013; Wong and Khovanskaya,
2018) aims at imagining alternative futures and how the
designed objects would alter, shape, and redefine our hu-
man world. Speculative design projects look beyond what
is technologically or culturally possible right now and can
thus contribute to the trajectories of technology develop-
ment. Critical design, on the other hand, aims to challenge
our assumptions of how these designed objects would fit in
our human world (Dunne and Raby, 2013; Bardzell et al.,
2012). Critical design provokes and critiques rather than
provides solutions. Thus, research through speculative and
critical design allows us to imagine different futures, which
helps us to prepare for them. This approach aims at widen-
ing our understanding of what would matter and to whom
in our future worlds, especially from diversity, equity, and
inclusion points of view.
It will also help us reveal the
underlying ideologies and ecosystems of current and near-
future approaches in computational co-creativity and gen-
erative AI. The astonishing speed at which these technolo-
gies are developing requires such future-oriented design ap-
proaches to anticipate and shape how they will affect our
world. There could be alternative ways to achieve such a cri-
tique and reflection on computational creativity. For exam-
ple, critical analysis and creative writing may also contribute
knowledge in this area. The perspective of research through
design, speculative design and critical design is only one
possible approach. Nevertheless, considering the interactive
essence of computational co-creativity tools, a design-based
approach may be more appropriate for the direct experience,
knowledge and reflection from users and developers.
Besides this research, there are also other ways to de-
velop speculative and critical design perspectives in compu-
tational co-creativity. First, co-speculation Workshops. To
place end-users of design in focus, we plan to carry out co-
speculation workshops with post-workshop interviews or fo-
cus groups. Co-speculation is a collaborative method within
speculative design practices that incorporates non-design ex-
perts (Desjardins et al., 2019; Wakkary et al., 2018). Second,
co-speculating with sketches and prototypes.
We plan
to use design sketches, user experience scenarios, and low-
fidelity prototypes as conversation prompts in a series of co-
speculative workshops. Sketching is a fundamental part of
the design process that helps designers generate and discuss
design ideas (Greenberg et al., 2012). The design process is
more about getting the right design, than getting one design
right. To get the right design, one should consider many
ideas rather than a single one to find a better overall solu-
tion (Buxton, 2007). To achieve this we will: 1) generate as
many ideas as possible, e.g., inspired by brainstorming, dis-
cussions, lateral thinking, client discussions, observations of
end users, etc.; 2) choose the most promising ones after re-
flecting on all the ideas and then develop them further par-
allelly; 3) add new ideas when they come up during further
design work.
Limitations
In this paper, we determine suitable topic numbers for fur-
ther evaluation by exhausting as many modeling settings
as possible and then manually screening them. There are,
however, ways to automatically evaluate the models. For
example, the R package ”ladtuning” can synthesize multi-
ple methods of evaluating the most suitable topic number
and present the result automatically (Nikita, 2016; Geva,
Oestreicher-Singer, and Saar-Tsechansky, 2019).
Using
these packages would improve the validity and credibility of
methods used in LDA modeling. However, even with these
automatic evaluations, interpretations from researchers are
still indispensable.
The other limitation is the data collected. We only bring
the abstracts and full text from Web of Science and Scopus
into consideration. computational co-creativity must have
publications beyond these databases as an emerging and ac-
tive field. Future studies can involve more data from differ-
ent sources for a more comprehensive scoping.
Conclusion
This position paper reports results from a bibliometric anal-
ysis and Latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) topic modelling
on 916 research articles on human-computer interaction and
computational creativity. The analyses revealed that the field
is dominated by technology-oriented research and that al-
though design emerged as a topic, it was heavily oriented
towards instrumental perspectives. Additional analysis of
design-related papers identified a lack of critical speculation
on the potential impact of the widespread adoption of com-
putational creativity. Therefore, we would like to call for
critical and speculative design perspectives to examine these
human-computer co-creation relationships and propose al-
ternative value orientations and approaches for further re-
search and development of computational creativity.
References
Algarni, A.
2020.
Neuroscience of creativity in human
computer interaction. In Proceedings of the Future Tech-
nologies Conference (FTC) 2019: Volume 1, 248–262.
Springer.
Aria, M., and Cuccurullo, C. 2017. bibliometrix: An r-tool
for comprehensive science mapping analysis. Journal of
Informetrics 11:959–975.
Auger, J. 2013. Speculative design: crafting the speculation.
Digital Creativity 24(1):11–35.
Aziz, S.; Dowling, M.; Hammami, H.; and Piepenbrink, A.
2022. Machine learning in finance: A topic modeling ap-
proach. European Financial Management 28(3):744–770.
Barde, B. V., and Bainwad, A. M.
2017.
An overview
of topic modeling methods and tools. In 2017 Interna-
tional Conference on Intelligent Computing and Control
Systems (ICICCS), 745–750.
Bardzell, J.; Bardzell, S.; and Koefoed Hansen, L. 2015. Im-
modest proposals: Research through design and knowl-
edge. In Proceedings of the 33rd annual ACM conference
on human factors in computing systems, 2093–2102.
Bardzell, S.; Bardzell, J.; Forlizzi, J.; Zimmerman, J.; and
Antanitis, J. 2012. Critical design and critical theory: the
challenge of designing for provocation. In Proceedings of
the designing interactive systems conference, 288–297.
Blei, D. M.; Ng, A. Y.; and Jordan, M. I. 2003. Latent dirich-
let allocation. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 3(null):993–1022.
Bonnardel, N., and Marm`eche, E. 2005. Towards support-
ing evocation processes in creative design: A cognitive
approach. International journal of human-computer stud-
ies 63(4-5):422–435.
Brassett, J. 2016. Speculative machines and technical men-
talities: a philosophical approach to designing the future.
Digital Creativity 27(2):163–176.
Braun, V., and Clarke, V. 2012. Thematic analysis. Ameri-
can Psychological Association.
Broadus, R. 1987. Early approaches to bibliometrics. Jour-
nal of The American Society for Information Science - J
AMER SOC INFORM SCI 38:127–129.
Buena˜no-Fernandez, D.; Gonz´alez, M.; Gil, D.; and Luj´an-
Mora, S. 2020. Text mining of open-ended questions in
self-assessment of university teachers: An lda topic mod-
eling approach. IEEE Access 8:35318–35330.
Buschek, D.; Mecke, L.; Lehmann, F.; and Dang, H.
2021. Nine potential pitfalls when designing human-ai
co-creative systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.00358.
Buxton, B. 2007. Sketching User Experiences: Getting the
Design Right and the Right Design. San Francisco, CA,
USA: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc.
Calderwood, A.; Qiu, V.; Gero, K. I.; and Chilton, L. B.
2020. How novelists use generative language models: An
exploratory user study. In HAI-GEN+ user2agent@ IUI.
Desjardins, A.; Key, C.; Biggs, H. R.; and Aschenbeck,
K. 2019. Bespoke booklets: A method for situated co-
speculation.
In Proceedings of the 2019 on Designing
Interactive Systems Conference, DIS ’19, 697–709. New
York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery.
Donthu, N.; Kumar, S.; Mukherjee, D.; Pandey, N.; and Lim,
W. M. 2021. How to conduct a bibliometric analysis: An
overview and guidelines. Journal of Business Research
133.
Dunne, A., and Raby, F. 2013. Speculative everything: de-
sign, fiction, and social dreaming. MIT press.
Edmonds, E. A.; Weakley, A.; Candy, L.; Fell, M.; Knott,
R.; and Pauletto, S. 2005. The studio as laboratory: Com-
bining creative practice and digital technology research.
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies 63(4-
5):452–481.
Geva, H.; Oestreicher-Singer, G.; and Saar-Tsechansky, M.
2019. Using retweets when shaping our online persona:
Topic modeling approach. MIS Q. 43(2):501–524.
Goncharenko,
V.
2022.
Chatgpt
learns
mas-
sively multiplayer online game development.
Meta-
verse Post.
https://mpost.io/chatgpt-learns-massively-
multiplayer-online-game-development/.
Goodfellow, I. J.; Pouget-Abadie, J.; Mirza, M.; Xu, B.;
Warde-Farley, D.; Ozair, S.; Courville, A.; and Bengio,
Y. 2014. Generative adversarial networks.
Greenberg, S.; Carpendale, S.; Marquardt, N.; and Buxton,
B. 2012. 1.2 - why should i sketch?: a synopsis of bux-
ton’s sketching user experiences: Getting the design right
and the right design. In Greenberg, S.; Carpendale, S.;
Marquardt, N.; and Buxton, B., eds., Sketching User Ex-
periences: The Workbook. Boston: Morgan Kaufmann.
7–12.
Houde, S.; Liao, V.; Martino, J.; Muller, M.; Piorkowski,
D.; Richards, J.; Weisz, J.; and Zhang, Y. 2020. Busi-
ness (mis) use cases of generative ai.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2003.07679.
Jang, S., and Nam, K. 2022. Utilization of speculative de-
sign for designing human-ai interactions.
Kantosalo, A., and Riihiaho, S.
2019.
Experience
evaluations for human–computer co-creative processes–
planning and conducting an evaluation in practice. Con-
nection Science 31(1):60–81.
Kapur, A., and Ansari, N. S. 2022. Coding reality: implica-
tions of ai for documentary media. Studies in Documen-
tary Film 16(2):174–185.
Kaur, P. C.; Ghorpade, T.; and Mane, V.
2017.
Extrac-
tion of unigram and bigram topic list by using latent
dirichlet markov allocation and sentiment classification.
In 2017 International Conference on Energy, Communi-
cation, Data Analytics and Soft Computing (ICECDS),
2332–2339. IEEE.
Kitchenham,
B.
2004.
Procedures
for
performing
systematic
reviews.
https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/document?repid=rep1&type=pdf
&doi=29890a936639862f45cb9a987dd599dce9759bf5.
K¨uhl, N.; Goutier, M.; Hirt, R.; and Satzger, G. 2020. Ma-
chine learning in artificial intelligence: Towards a com-
mon understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.04686.
Lajeunesse, M. 2016. Facilitating systematic reviews, data
extraction, and meta-analysis with the metagear package
for r. Methods in Ecology and Evolution 7:323–330.
Liikkanen, L. A.
2019.
It ain’t nuttin’new–interaction
design practice after the ai hype. In Human-Computer
Interaction–INTERACT 2019: 17th IFIP TC 13 Interna-
tional Conference, Paphos, Cyprus, September 2–6, 2019,
Proceedings, Part IV 17, 600–604. Springer.
Linnenluecke, M. K.; Marrone, M.; and Singh, A. K. 2020.
Conducting systematic literature reviews and bibliometric
analyses. Australian Journal of Management 45(2):175–
194.
Liu, H. X.
2022.
Building the “complete game”:
An overview study of a development strategy for geo
ar mobile games.
In HCI International 2022 - Late
Breaking Papers. Interaction in New Media, Learning
and Games: 24th International Conference on Human-
Computer Interaction, HCII 2022, Virtual Event, June
26–July 1, 2022, Proceedings, 604–622. Berlin, Heidel-
berg: Springer-Verlag.
Ma, Y.; Yang, H.; Liu, B.; Fu, J.; and Liu, J. 2022. Ai
illustrator: Translating raw descriptions into images by
prompt-based cross-modal generation. In Proceedings of
the 30th ACM International Conference on Multimedia,
MM ’22, 4282–4290. New York, NY, USA: Association
for Computing Machinery.
Meho, L. I., and Yang, K. 2007. Impact of data sources
on citation counts and rankings of lis faculty: Web of sci-
ence versus scopus and google scholar. Journal of the
american society for information science and technology
58(13):2105–2125.
Mitchell, A.
2022.
Professor catches student cheat-
ing with chatgpt:
‘i feel abject terror’.
New
York Post.
https://nypost.com/2022/12/26/students-
using-chatgpt-to-cheat-professor-warns/.
Mountstephens, J., and Teo, J. 2020. Progress and chal-
lenges in generative product design: A review of systems.
Computers 9(4):80.
Muller, M.; Ross, S.; Houde, S.; Agarwal, M.; Martinez, F.;
Richards, J.; Talamadupula, K.; and Weisz, J. D. 2022.
Drinking chai with your (ai) programming partner: A
design fiction about generative ai for software engineer-
ing. In Joint International Conference on Intelligent User
Interfaces Workshops: APEx-UI, HAI-GEN, HEALTHI,
HUMANIZE, TExSS, SOCIALIZE.
Nakakoji, K.; Yamamoto, Y.; and Ohira, M. 2000. Computa-
tional support for collective creativity. Knowledge-Based
Systems 13(7-8):451–458.
Nikita, M. 2016. ldatuning: Tuning of the latent dirichlet
allocation models parameters. R package version 0.2-0,
URL https://CRAN. R-project. org/package= ldatuning.
P´erez,
R.
R.
2022.
A
conversation
with
chatgpt
about
videogame
development.
https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/conversation-chatgpt-
videogame-development-roberto-romero-p%C3%A9rez/.
Reddy, A.
2022.
Artificial everyday creativity: creative
leaps with ai through critical making. Digital Creativity
1–19.
ˇReh˚uˇrek, R., and Sojka, P.
2010.
Software Framework
for Topic Modelling with Large Corpora.
In Proceed-
ings of the LREC 2010 Workshop on New Challenges
for NLP Frameworks, 45–50.
Valletta, Malta: ELRA.
http://is.muni.cz/publication/884893/en.
Rowley, J., and Slack, F.
2004.
Conducting a literature
review. Management research news 27(6):31–39.
Ryan, B.; Kirsten, B.; Kasia, C.; Ruth, D.; Chelsey, G.;
Shawn, G.; Ayana, M.; ´Alvaro, V.; Victoria, V.; Fathiya,
W.; and Cristina, W. 2018. Computational creativity. In
Graham, S., ed., Digital Humanities – A Primer. Carleton
University. chapter 10.
Steyvers, M., and Griffiths, T.
2007.
Probabilistic topic
models. In Handbook of latent semantic analysis. Psy-
chology Press. 439–460.
Team, R. C.
2013.
R: A language and environment for
statistical computing. http://www.R-project.org/.
Ullstein, C., and Hohendanner, M. 2020. Exploration of
the Future of Co-Creative Systems Through Collaborative
Speculative Design Practices.
Vayansky, I., and Kumar, S. 2020. A review of topic mod-
eling methods. Information Systems 94:101582.
Vinyals, O.; Toshev, A.; Bengio, S.; and Erhan, D. 2015.
Show and tell: A neural image caption generator. In 2015
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
nition (CVPR), 3156–3164.
Wakkary, R.; Oogjes, D.; Lin, H. W. J.; and Hauser, S. 2018.
Philosophers living with the tilting bowl. In Proceedings
of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Com-
puting Systems, CHI ’18, 1–12. New York, NY, USA:
Association for Computing Machinery.
Wong, R. Y., and Khovanskaya, V. 2018. Speculative design
in HCI: from corporate imaginations to critical orienta-
tions. Springer.
Wood, C. 2021. Artificial intelligence experience: Partici-
patory art workshops to explore ai imaginaries. In Rout-
ledge Handbook of Art, Science, and Technology Studies.
Routledge. 426–449.
Yue, W. T.; Wang, Q.-H.; and Hui, K.-L. 2019. See no
evil, hear no evil? dissecting the impact of online hacker
forums. Mis Quarterly 43(1):73.
Zimmerman, J.; Forlizzi, J.; and Evenson, S. 2007. Re-
search through design as a method for interaction design
research in hci. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference
on Human factors in computing systems, 493–502.
