 
Experiential Speculation in Vision-Based AI Design Education
Citation for published version (APA):
Huang, Y.-C. J., Wensveen, S. A. G., & Funk, M. (2023). Experiential Speculation in Vision-Based AI Design
Education: Designing Conventional and Progressive AI Futures. International Journal of Design, 17(2), 1-17.
https://doi.org/10.57698/v17i2.01
Document license:
CC BY
DOI:
10.57698/v17i2.01
Document status and date:
Published: 01/08/2023
Document Version:
Publisher’s PDF, also known as Version of Record (includes final page, issue and volume numbers)
Please check the document version of this publication:
• A submitted manuscript is the version of the article upon submission and before peer-review. There can be
important differences between the submitted version and the official published version of record. People
interested in the research are advised to contact the author for the final version of the publication, or visit the
DOI to the publisher's website.
• The final author version and the galley proof are versions of the publication after peer review.
• The final published version features the final layout of the paper including the volume, issue and page
numbers.
Link to publication
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
            • Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
            • You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
            • You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal.
If the publication is distributed under the terms of Article 25fa of the Dutch Copyright Act, indicated by the “Taverne” license above, please
follow below link for the End User Agreement:
www.tue.nl/taverne
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us at:
openaccess@tue.nl
providing details and we will investigate your claim.
Download date: 09. Mar. 2024
www.ijdesign.org 
1 
International Journal of Design Vol. 17 No. 2 2023
Introduction
The advancement of new technologies always had an influence 
on the practices and perspectives in design. The influence of 
Artificial Intelligence (AI) on design already dates back to the 
1970s when one of the founding parents of Artificial Intelligence 
in the 1950s, Herb Simon made his first contributions to the 
principles of Design Thinking (Simon, 1969). However, the 
recent advancements and availability of data, computation, and 
AI technologies and tools have broader and deeper implications 
for design. AI is now increasingly embedded in various products 
and systems, and services to support our everyday activities. AI 
will continue to change how designers work, what they design, 
and why they design. 
While prior literature has argued that computers or advanced 
technology can offer new modes of exploration and experimentation, 
they can be limiting in terms of the types of forms and designs they 
can generate (Steenson, 2017). When it comes to AI, designers are 
facing similar situations but great challenges here: first, examples of 
novel and interesting applications of a combination of AI and design 
are missing. Current AI-infused applications (e.g., self-driving 
cars, smart thermostats, etc.) focus on an improved performance, 
efficiency, usability, or user experience of conventional product 
categories. What we miss are critical perspectives on design that 
are beyond what we have known so far. Second, current design 
education struggles to teach accessible AI to designers (Dove et 
al., 2017), or is only recently progressing. Moreover, there is little 
consensus about what designers should know about AI and how to 
combine this knowledge with the design competences in creativity 
and aesthetics. 
The current design education and on-the-job training has no 
place for extensive AI components due to curricula being tightly 
packed with other topics. While there is progress on easy-to-
understand resources for novice learners (Hebron, 2016a, 2016b), 
relevant materials or courses to educate designers what they 
should know about AI and how they could envision AI futures 
in a diverse way are lacking. We use AI here synonymously 
with a broader definition of machine intelligence, including 
data, machine learning algorithms (ML), and other modern AI 
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Experiential Speculation in Vision-Based AI Design 
Education: Designing Conventional and Progressive 
AI Futures
Yi-Ching (Janet) Huang *, Stephan Wensveen, and Mathias Funk
Department of Industrial Design, Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven, The Netherlands
Artificial Intelligence (AI) will change how designers design, what they design, and why they design. Recent efforts have extended 
design education with AI and related machine learning (ML) concepts and technologies. Often, these courses are grounded in other fields 
such as Computer Science, Electrical and Mechanical Engineering, and Social Sciences. However, few courses teach AI concepts and 
technologies in combination with creativity, aesthetics, and speculation to leverage the expertise of design. We explored this combination 
to allow students to creatively design AI exemplars. In a nine-week design activity, students envision and prototype AI exemplars that 
are based on their personal vision and aesthetic values. This paper reports on our vision, course design, educational context, and learning 
activities with a focus on developing and integrating different areas of design expertise with AI technology. We contribute insights into 1) 
what was designed: six design cases, resulting in design speculations, prototypes, and critical reflections as well as our design critiques of 
these AI exemplars. Then, 2) how to design with a vision-based approach to AI design education in comparison to other approaches, and 
3) a futuring landscape with three horizons unpacking why to design with AI.
Keywords – Vision-Based Design Education, AI Design Education, Experiential Speculation, AI-based Scenarios, Vision-Based Futuring 
Landscape.  
Relevance to Design Practice – This work contributes an alternative perspective on AI education in design, including a vision-based 
futuring landscape aligned with six exemplars and design critiques as well as an analysis of different approaches for AI design education. 
These insights will open a new design space for designers to envision possible futures from various angles.
Citation: Huang, Y.-C. J., Wensveen, S., & Funk, M. (2023). Experiential speculation in vision-based AI design education: Designing conventional and progressive AI futures. 
International Journal of Design, 17(2), 1-17. https://doi.org/10.57698/v17i2.01
Received December 23, 2022; Accepted June 16, 2023; Published August 31, 2023.
Copyright: © 2023 Huang, Wensveen, & Funk. Copyright for this article is retained 
by the authors, with first publication rights granted to the International Journal of 
Design. All journal content is open-accessed and allowed to be shared and adapted 
in accordance with the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 
4.0) License.
*Corresponding Author: y.c.huang@tue.nl
www.ijdesign.org 
2 
International Journal of Design Vol. 17 No. 2 2023
Experiential Speculation in Vision-Based AI Design Education: Designing Conventional and Progressive AI Futures
technology (e.g., generative models). What we currently see in 
Design and AI education is mostly playing-with, designing-
around, or designing-for, but not designing-with1. We propose 
experiential speculation, an amalgam of speculative, vision-based 
conceptual design and experiential making, as a way to educate 
design students about the essential characteristics of designing 
with AI/ML technology.
Teaching AI in Design
In the last years, trailing the beginning of the current AI hype 
by a few years, various design (engineering) programs in higher 
education have incorporated elements of AI and ML into their 
curriculum. Some institutions even have created new AI-centric 
courses. As much as this captures a technology trend and inspires 
education innovation, this also presents considerable challenges. 
Teaching AI at technical depth in design is mostly unfeasible 
due to the broad scope of the domain, its rapid progression, and 
the substantial complexity of required background knowledge. 
AI and ML technologies are deeply rooted in various academic 
fields, each carrying its own legacy of knowledge, methods, and 
paradigms. 
First, there are courses that focus on teaching design 
students to gain knowledge and skills regarding a variety of 
AI techniques or algorithms (e.g., classifications, clustering, 
reinforcement learning, neural networks, etc.), essentially a 
radically lightened form of a conventional computer science or 
data science curriculum. This approach has its merits for a design 
education program: it establishes a solid working vocabulary for 
future multi-disciplinary collaboration with engineers and data 
scientists. There is by now an abundance of teaching material 
and the structure is compatible with external resources that can 
be accessed online by students. Common results of this teaching 
approach as applied to design are technology-driven design 
projects that start with a dataset or model and restructure, reframe, 
and repurpose it towards a new application area. In this way, 
designers take the role of the junior technologist designing with 
AI techniques, yet mostly not reaching a stage of actual design. 
The high pace of development remains a threat to this approach.
Second, another strategy for incorporating AI and ML into 
design programs is to let design students take a more disciplinary 
stance and design with the special properties of AI/ML 
applications. Here, educators focus on user interface (UI) and user 
experience (UX) challenges that emerge with the uncertainty and 
probabilistic nature of ML applications, essentially framing and 
packaging an unstable core of sought-after functionality (Dove 
et al., 2017). This approach also has merits in terms of hands-on 
skills and understanding of specific new properties, strong links to 
commercial or industrial use-cases, future employment prospects, 
and multi-disciplinary team skills. The drawback is that this 
designing-around will unlikely lead to entirely new applications 
and use-cases. The learning experience is tailored to mediating 
and improving raw technology, targeting a contemporary user 
base. This, ultimately, reinforces a conventional view of design as 
giving form to what has been engineered.
Lastly, the third approach emphasizes creating new 
experiences that involve data and AI, and that embrace the inherent 
uncertainty and openness of AI and ML technologies. We see that 
this approach can be operationalized in two ways: (1) working with 
a fixed set of exemplary tools in the computational creativity space 
(Artistic design with ML tools, see Table 1), or (2) following a vision 
and value-based journey that touches on both speculative design or 
design futuring, and experiential making (Experiential ML-based 
speculation, see Table 1). The former has its merits in artistically 
exploring a design space spanned by the employed tooling 
(playing-with), which is attractive and inspiring to design students 
at different levels. The potential downside lies in the conceptual and 
technical limitations of specific tools. The latter, more open-ended 
approach can help realize broader visions of designing for AI, with 
the potential caveat of limits in how far AI-based prototyping can 
be pushed in the given time and with the available background 
knowledge. A common implementation of this perspective is 
largely conceptual with traces of low-fi making. In the following, 
we deal with these two operationalizations separately.
A Vision of AI Education in Design
Taking the last approach further into experiential speculation, we 
envision design education dealing with AI knowledge and skills 
in a constructive way, resulting in experiential future scenarios 
that are supported, but not dominated by designing with AI. This, 
facilitated by a course design that allows students to explore the 
opportunities of combining creativity and aesthetics with AI, 
and specific challenges in design education where, so far, (1) 
examples of meaningful (near-future) applications are missing, 
(2) AI as a new design material is difficult for designers to access 
due to technicality and depth needed, (3) a balance between 
Janet Huang has been an Assistant Professor in the department of Industrial 
Design at Eindhoven University of Technology since 2020. She earned her PhD 
in Computer Science at National Taiwan University in 2018, where her research 
focused on designing intelligent systems that support people to accomplish 
creative tasks. Currently, her research aims to explore human-AI co-learning 
for facilitating new ways of creativity and productivity. More specifically, she 
strives to design and develop novel toolkits that empower designers to become 
proficient with AI as design materials. These toolkits enable designers to harness 
the power of data, computation, and AI techniques to tackle diverse and intricate 
problems across various contexts.
Stephan Wensveen is full professor of ‘Constructive Design Research in 
Smart Products, Services and Systems’ at Industrial Design (TU/e Eindhoven 
University of Technology). He studied Industrial Design Engineering (MSc, 
PhD) at TUDelft. In 2002 he joined ID (TU/e). In 2011 he expanded his horizon 
on multi-disciplinary design and Participatory Innovation in Southern Denmark. 
Since 2013 he is back in Eindhoven. He has always been interested in using 
the power of design to integrate research, education and innovation. He is 
co-responsible for canonical examples and approaches to Research through 
Design and ‘aesthetics of interaction’. Many of his papers are part of the standard 
curricula in interaction design schools and he is co-author of the book ‘Design 
Research through Practice’. His most recent interest is in the development of 
designers’ competence towards an ‘aesthetics of intelligence’.
Mathias Funk is an Associate Professor in the Future Everyday group in the 
Department of Industrial Design at Eindhoven University of Technology (TU/e). 
He has a background in Computer Science and a PhD in Electrical Engineering 
(from TU/e). His research interests include methods and tools for designing with 
data, designing systems of smart things, and interfaces for musical expression. 
In the past, he has researched at ATR (Japan), RWTH Aachen, Philips Consumer 
Lifestyle and Philips Experience Design, Intel Labs (Santa Clara), National 
Taiwan University of Science and Technology, and National Taiwan University. 
He is also the co-founder of UXsuite, a high-tech spin-off from TU/e.
www.ijdesign.org 
3 
International Journal of Design Vol. 17 No. 2 2023
Y.-C. J. Huang, S. Wensveen, and M. Funk
technology push, designerly pull, and user needs is difficult to 
operationalize, and (4) process stages, design activities, and tools 
might be missing or might not fit this new type of ideation. Our 
vision on design and AI education is indeed along the lines of 
three horizons: new perspectives on sensory experiences, new 
conceptual designs for products and services, and new discourse 
on ways of living. Design cases in this vision borrow from all 
three horizons, emphasizing one of them.
Contributions
This paper presents experiential speculation, an alternative 
perspective on vision-based AI education in design, using a 
course design that operationalizes this vision in a university-level 
Industrial Design Master program. This course resulted in six 
projects created by student teams who explored diverse topics 
with the given design brief and visionary foci, including two 
conventional design cases, two progressive design cases, and two 
in-between cases. We use these cases to (1) exemplify the diverse 
directions that the teams took and (2) analyze and interpret the 
design space for the AI education in design. The six design cases 
serve as a portfolio of exemplars, along with our design critiques. 
Furthermore, we present our analysis of the cases based on identified 
design qualities and the aforementioned vision-based directions: 
new perspectives on sensory experiences, new conceptual designs 
for products and services, and new discourse on ways of living. 
Finally, we reflect on our approach and discuss key challenges and 
struggles from both teacher and student perspectives. Concluding, 
we return to our vision for AI education in design, which combines 
AI technologies with creativity and aesthetics.
Related Work
Challenges of Designing with AI 
With the rapid advancement of AI technology, designers face 
immense challenges when it comes to designing AI-infused 
systems. Oftentimes, designers overlook the potential design 
opportunities that ML presents and struggle to envision novel uses 
of ML (Dove et al., 2017). While designers may have a broad 
understanding of how ML works, they still lack a clear grasp of 
what it takes to design with it. Moreover, design-led innovation 
of ML remains uncommon in the current practice (Yang, 2018). 
Thus, design researchers are not exploring ways to empower 
designers to work with AI/ML as a new design material (Dove et 
al., 2017; Holmquist, 2017; Yang et al., 2018).
To tackle these challenges, recent work proposes new 
approaches and tools aimed at supporting designers to understand 
ML as a creative material (Yang et al., 2020). Moreover, there is 
a growing need to educate future designers in ways that enable 
them not only to acquire fundamental knowledge and skills for 
prototyping with AI, but also to collaborate effectively with 
engineers or data scientists while maintaining an open-ended 
mindset and creative approach to this complex technology in 
various contexts. Recent work has investigated the current 
practices and experiences of experienced UX designers who 
closely worked with AI practitioners in industry (Yang et al., 
2018). This work argues that designers do not necessarily 
require an in-depth practical understanding of AI/ML to create 
AI prototypes or systems, but rather need to focus on grasping 
the abstract capabilities of the technology. Therefore, suggestions 
have been put forth regarding the development of design-oriented 
abstractions of ML’s technological capabilities, the use of 
exemplars and sensitizing concepts of ML-enhanced designs, 
and the creation of boundary objects that bridge the domains of 
UX and ML expertise. However, these suggestions conflict with 
other lines of education, with emphasis on teaching designers the 
statistical knowledge of ML (Hebron, 2016a, 2016b). 
While the prevailing approach focuses on understanding 
particular ML capabilities and promoting collaboration within 
multidisciplinary teams, we adopt a different perspective that 
embraces openness and freedom when dealing with the challenge 
of designing with AI. Rather than attempting to teach how to 
design or implement AI-infused systems in a course context, we 
encourage students to design entire propositions with AI. This 
approach fosters an open exploration of how to live with AI and 
what the opportunities of AI can be. Our goal is not to strive for 
incremental improvements, but rather to inspire ground-breaking 
leaps in what we can think of and design.
Challenges for AI Design Education
There are two distinct approaches to educating designers on how 
to design with data and AI (Yang et al., 2018). The first approach 
argues that designers cannot effectively work with a material 
they do not fully understand. As such, it places emphasis on 
teaching designers about the statistical knowledge and process 
of ML products (Cartwright, 2016; Treseler, 2017). Numerous 
books, courses, and online resources have been developed to 
assist designers in gaining a fundamental understanding of AI/
ML (Hebron, 2016a, 2016b). For example, the book Machine 
Learning for Designers provides a brief introduction to essential 
concepts of various learning algorithms, including supervised 
learning, unsupervised learning, semi-supervised learning, and 
reinforcement learning (Hebron, 2016a). The second approach 
aligns with the argument that designers do not necessarily 
need a full understanding of AI/ML technologies to use them 
in their designs. This highlights the importance of grasping the 
abstractions of ML’s capabilities and employing exemplars to 
help designers envision how these technologies can be applied 
in their work. In line with this suggestion, researchers have 
developed design patterns and boundary objects to facilitate 
effective communication between designers, data scientist, and 
AI engineers within multidisciplinary teams (Yang et al., 2018). 
In response to the emerging challenges of AI design education, 
several courses have recently emerged. One notable course, 
developed by Zimmerman and Pangaro, aims to guide design 
students in acquiring a foundational understanding of various 
types of AI/ML systems and teaches them how to apply AI in 
today’s commercial products through in-class discussion, design 
sprint, and a series of mini design projects (Yang, 2020). Instead 
of technology realization and software development, the focus is 
www.ijdesign.org 
4 
International Journal of Design Vol. 17 No. 2 2023
Experiential Speculation in Vision-Based AI Design Education: Designing Conventional and Progressive AI Futures
on engaging students in gaining hands-on experience and having 
a conversation with AI as a design material through reflection-in 
and on-action. Through this process, students envision AI-infused 
products and services addressing user needs. 
Kaspersen (2023), inspired by the three key dimensions of 
Computational Thinking (Brennan & Resnick, 2012), proposes 
a framework for Machine Learning (ML) education for K-12 
children with ML concepts (knowledge about, e.g., data, models), 
practices (skills in, e.g., data gathering, training, evaluation), 
and ML perspectives (attitudes towards life and society, e.g., 
transparency, fairness). Whereas the first approach seems to 
focus primarily on the knowledge concepts around AI, the 
second approach focusses more on the design practices to work 
with AI engineers. The recent courses try to combine concepts 
and practices. Kaspersen (2023) also points out that educational 
tools and activities that address concepts and practices rarely 
address the perspectives and implication of ML and vice versa. 
In our course, we aim to combine AI concepts and practices with 
perspectives. We encourage students to explore the ideas that not 
only align with personal vision and societal value (perspectives) 
but also match the intersection of AI technology and aesthetics. 
We encourage students to build (practice) experiential prototypes 
that demonstrate qualities of integrating AI concepts into products 
or services.
Apart from the connection of AI to computer science, 
engineering, or UX, there is a line of ML education for artists, 
musicians, and other creatives. Fiebrink et al. (2019) describe 
courses and tools for ML education that can lead to new creative 
outputs, means for self-expression, and economic impact from 
ML in creative technologies. This work singles out supervised 
machine learning and interactive machine learning as the primary 
ML techniques and promotes the Wekinator software as the 
primary ML tool.
Like our course, one course designed by van Allen and 
Hooker aims for an open-ended exploration for the design of 
AI and ML. This course investigates how AI impacts urban, 
human-scale environment. In the course, students create a useless 
AI product and engage in making sense of AI through open 
experimentation (van Allen & Hooker, 2017). Our approach 
aligns with such aims to create an open space for designers to 
envision how AI could be embedded in a context: designers use 
their creativity to speculate diverse, visionary applications. These 
applications can be speculative, strange, and experimental, but 
engaged with real issues in the field.
Creativity & Aesthetics as Driver for Data and AI
Creativity and aesthetics have always been the essential 
competences of designers. Both depend on technology, as every 
advancement in technology offers new opportunities for the 
creative process. Industrial designers have, for decades, explored 
the relationship between the latest production technologies 
and the appearance of products. In the early 2000s, however, 
industrial designers started a paradigmatic shift from aesthetics of 
appearance, primarily visual, towards an aesthetics of interaction 
with different underlying qualities and principles (Djajadiningrat 
et al., 2000; Petersen et al., 2004). This shift was made possible 
and even necessary with the advancements in technology, from 
physical materials and production technologies towards digital 
materials, computation, and information technologies. Where 
before the 2000s, metal, textiles, and plastics were the primary 
design materials, after, interactivity and computation became 
the primary design materials. Artificial intelligence and data are 
the next emerging technologies and materials for design, and 
future design tools will seamlessly include data and intelligence. 
Designs embedded with AI-technologies have the potential for 
novel aesthetic experiences beyond appearance and interaction, 
with yet to explore underlying qualities and principles. This can 
lead to the next paradigmatic shift for design aesthetics, which 
Wensveen (2018, p. 26) refers to as the aesthetics of intelligence. 
In our course, we explore how these new AI technologies 
and data will influence the aesthetics of intelligent products, 
services, and systems and how the aesthetic values of designers 
will influence the use of intelligence. 
While aesthetics has its origins in the philosophy of art, 
we provide our design students with a more general introduction, 
and frame aesthetics both as a set of underlying qualities and 
principles for a design, and as a critical reflection of how people 
create, use, enjoy, or dislike design. These reflections can treat 
design on three different levels (Folkmann, 2013), the sensual, the 
conceptual, and the discursive level. On the sensual level, design 
aesthetics emphasizes how design creates novel kinds of sensorial 
experiences and has innovative effects on the look, feel, or 
sound of the designed experience. This sensual level is generally 
understood as the meaning of design aesthetics. However, our 
interest goes beyond the purely sensorial experience that new AI 
technologies may provide for design. On the next level of design 
aesthetics, the conceptual level, the critical reflection happens on 
how the designs themselves become carriers of new concepts and 
the designed technology allows for new everyday experiences. 
On the discursive level of design aesthetics, the design provides 
critical reflections and perspectives on current society or 
speculations on future ways of living with technologies.
In alignment with our vision, we want students to critically 
engage with the diverse possibilities of AI technologies and 
explore the sensual, conceptual, and discursive aesthetics of these 
technologies and deviate from the conventional trends surrounding 
AI. We want them to imagine and design new aesthetic experiences 
and perspectives of understanding and engaging with the current 
world through AI, or design with AI technologies to debate entire 
new worlds made possible. The focus on aesthetics supports the 
experiential speculation, as it foregrounds both the experiential 
and sensual qualities of design, and the critical exploration of 
novel perspectives.
From a creativity perspective we expect our students 
to stretch their imagination, take risks in exploring novel and 
uncertain areas, and make decisions based on little information. To 
kick-start the creative design exploration, we ask the students to 
make explicit combinations between aspects of design aesthetics, 
their personal values, and aspects of AI technologies, making use 
of a common creative strategy of combining seemingly unrelated 
topics into new ideas.
www.ijdesign.org 
5 
International Journal of Design Vol. 17 No. 2 2023
Y.-C. J. Huang, S. Wensveen, and M. Funk
Course Design
This section introduces the educational context in which design 
students explore the alternative perspective. We describe the 
overall course structure, the educational activities, and the 
deliverables. The learning objective of the course is to allow design 
students to explore the interplay between data and intelligence, 
creativity and aesthetics, and their personal inspiration and vision.
Design Education Philosophy
Our design education philosophy is largely inspired by Schön to 
appreciate learning through doing and reflection in action. Similar 
to Schön, we focus more on the role of intuition, creativity, 
and improvisation in design practice and explore new ways of 
adequately dealing with the messiness and ambiguity of real-
world design problems (Schön, 1983). We also emphasize the 
importance of reflection-in-action, a process in which designers 
actively reflect on and adapt their designs as they are working on 
them. We strive for a more collaborative and iterative approach 
to design, in which designers work closely with users and other 
stakeholders to co-create solutions to complex problems. What 
makes our approach in the course unique is to incorporate personal 
visions as a drive for encouraging students to take bold steps to 
experiment with wild ideas by combining two distinct disciplines.  
Similar to our approach, Dubberly Design Office (Dubberly 
& Pangaro, 2015) has been actively involved in design education 
and has contributed to the development of design curricula. They 
endorse a holistic approach to design education that goes beyond 
traditional design disciplines and emphasize the importance of 
interdisciplinary collaboration, system thinking, and understanding 
the broader context in which design operates. They further encourage 
designers to think critically, explore multiple perspectives, and 
embrace complexity. Where they differ from us, however, lies in 
their major focus on human-centered design approach. We, on the 
other hand, maintain an openness to exploring new methodologies 
and looking into the opportunities of a more-than-human centered 
design approach. We urge design students to be more curious, 
adaptable, and open to continuous learning.
Educational Context
Each school of design is unique in its own context and in the 
specific ways it educates designers.  The key elements of our 
educational context are competence-centered education, and 
self-directed and vision-based learning allowing students to 
develop their unique professional identity. Our Industrial Design 
Master program at Eindhoven University of Technology is a 
two-year program where students with prior background in design 
or engineering specialize in their self-chosen direction. Students 
choose projects and courses to develop their own competence 
aligned with the Attitude, Skills, Knowledge (ASK) model 
(Bakarman, 2005) (see also Discussion for how we adapt ASK 
in the design education context). In addition, students develop a 
personal design vision that reflects their ideas and beliefs about 
the future of society and technology, and their role as designer 
in bridging the two and making an impact. The vision provides 
guidance to their professional specialization and gives personal 
meaning and motivation to their learning. 
In 2020, we introduced the Master course Creativity and 
Aesthetics of Data and AI (DCM210) with three goals in mind: 
1) to broaden our (students, staff, and the wider design research 
community) existing competency in AI beyond technology and 
user focus, 2) to introduce AI to students with an interest in 
creativity and aesthetics, but not (yet) in data and computational 
technologies, 3) to allow students to explore AI technologies in 
relation to their personal vision on society and technology. 
While all students in the course have a prior background 
in design (BDes, BSc) or engineering (BSc), their proficiency 
in technology, hands-on prototyping skills, and theoretical 
knowledge differs in level and specifics. In a sense, students’ prior 
baggage and specific interest for why they chose the course differ. 
Overall Structure and Course Design
The course is structured along three lines: 1) Creativity and 
Aesthetics, 2) Math, Data, and Computing and 3) Interplay 
between the two. Lines 1 and 2 have the same structure and 
learning activities: Introductory lectures and individual readings 
that introduce knowledge concepts, plenary discussions on their 
mutual relevance, and synthesis and communication of their 
personal insights into an annotated poster (Miro board, teams 
of two students), which is inspired by annotated portfolios 
(Bowers, 2012), as sensitizing concepts to open a space for design 
exploration and innovations. For the creation of a poster, students 
need to make use of their aesthetic and creative skills and explore 
the sensorial aspect of a graphical poster with a composition that 
balances the variety of visual elements, while the annotations 
require their analytical and argumentative skills. All posters are 
aggregated in one overview of all concepts for all students to share.
Creativity & Aesthetics (CA): For the knowledge concepts 
in Creativity & Aesthetics we choose a diversity of philosophies, 
theories, and design frameworks with their exemplary design 
cases. They range from well-established, e.g., Aesthetics of 
Interaction (Ross & Wensveen, 2010) to more recent topics, e.g., 
Post-humanism (Forlano, 2017). Concepts also range in their 
backgrounds, coming from a more academic, e.g., Perceptual 
Crossing (Deckers et al., 2012) or more artistic context, e.g., 
New Aesthetics (Bridle, 2011). All concepts are introduced with 
visuals and design exemplars for inspiration in an opening lecture.
Math, Data & Computing (MDC): Our choice for 
knowledge concepts in Math, Data & Computing is based on 
technological diversity, ranging from data, e.g., Collective 
Intelligence & Crowdsourcing (Kittur et al., 2013; Vaughan, 
2018), Data Programming and Data Augmentation (Ratner et 
al., 2016), algorithmic models, e.g., Reinforcement Learning 
(Ramesh et al., 2020), Generative Models (Foster, 2019), to 
recent trending topics, e.g., Interactive Machine Learning 
(Amershi et al., 2014), Human-AI Collaboration (Bansal et al., 
2021), Explainable AI (Abdul et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2019). The 
concepts are not mutual exclusive and might have some degrees 
of overlap. Also, they are making-focused; that is, each concept 
www.ijdesign.org 
6 
International Journal of Design Vol. 17 No. 2 2023
Experiential Speculation in Vision-Based AI Design Education: Designing Conventional and Progressive AI Futures
covers several techniques or algorithms to be implemented. We 
provide visual and conceptual design exemplars for inspiration in 
an introductory-level lecture around the knowledge concepts for 
Math, Data, and AI.
For each CA and MDC concept, we select one or two 
academic papers as seed papers for students to start with. They need 
to use the design exemplars and those seed papers to further develop 
their knowledge and understandings around the chosen topics.
When we talk about technology in this paper, we express 
that the student teams select concrete technology for their cases 
from three overlapping areas of technology accessible to them: 
creative computing, physical computing (e.g., sensors and signal 
process, tangible interaction, etc.), and AI and ML technology 
(e.g., generative models, reinforcement learning, interactive 
machine learning, etc.). In the remainder of the paper, we will 
refer to this as technology as opposed to creativity and aesthetic 
aspects of the design cases.
Personal and professional inspiration and vision: In 
the first week, students also explore and frame their personal and 
professional inspiration and their vision. We ask them to create a 
digital (e.g., Miro) annotated poster (images plus keywords, short 
pieces of text) that communicates their inspirational subjects. Our 
suggested list of potential subjects is inspired by the History of 
Beauty (Eco & McEwen, 2004): Beauty in ...nature (e.g., your 
love for out-door activities, flora, and fauna) ...cultural, moral 
values (interest in philosophy, religion, ethics) ...the arts, ...the 
everyday, ...technology and machines (e.g., mathematics, kinetic 
art, science fiction) ...functionality, ...the material (e.g., crafting 
soft materials, ceramics, wood) ...the provocation (e.g., critical 
design, dark scenarios). The poster needs to be a visual and textual 
communication of their personal and/or professional interest, their 
personal and socio-cultural values, and their vision on technology, 
society, and design.
The third line combines and integrates the knowledge of 
the first two lines to give form, beauty, expression, and meaning 
to user experiences as they are shaped by data and artificial 
intelligence (teams of 2 × 2). The activities in the third line are: 
envisioning, designing, prototyping, and design critiques. This 
line starts with a creative session combining all posters. The 
goal of the creative session is finding and deciding on the most 
inspiring triptych (combination of three posters) which will be 
worked out further during the design process. 
The suggested design process for the course follows a 
rough double diamond structure (Tschimmel, 2012); Discover the 
topics, combine them, and generate ideas, Define a first concept 
and receive mid-term design critique, Develop the concept and 
technology, Deliver the demonstrator in a plenary design critique 
and write the pictorial to communicate your academic argument. 
Each stage takes about two weeks.
The final deliverables include a visionary and experiential 
demonstrator, i.e., a high-quality artifact, prototype, movie, 
intervention, or performance, a pictorial, and a personal 
reflection. The demonstrator should provide a convincing 
aesthetic experience or discursive argument. We communicate 
the following criteria for this: Engages the audience into the 
underlying concepts and topics; has aesthetic quality of materials, 
interactions, and intelligence that showcases the values and 
perspectives of the design team; shows the computational and 
making-related competence of the design team.
For the pictorial we ask each team for a written and 
illustrated dissemination (rough draft, 4-10 pages) of the aesthetic 
experience and/or academic argument (article, pictorial) with a 
critical reflection or discussion. Appendices are added with short 
backgrounds of the different authors and their main roles in the 
research process, and additional information to give depth and 
detail to the specific design decisions.
The personal reflection (4 pages maximum: 2 pages of 
text, 2 pages of images) describes what they have learned, and 
the (un)expected insights they have gained from doing the course. 
Individual reflections are on three levels: 1) Knowledge: What 
do you know now about the different topics?; 2) Skills: Which 
skills did you acquire, what did you struggle with, what did you 
overcome, and how?; and 3) Attitude: What does this mean for the 
development of your professional identity and your vision?
Course Outcomes: Six Design Cases
This section presents six design cases from a single iteration 
of the course. We selected the cases from a single course to be 
comparable in terms of initial briefing, support, and collective 
sense-making of the design challenge. We order the cases on a 
scale ranging from being close to the status quo to approaching a 
near-future scenario. Each case is also discussed and reflected on 
the qualities we defined, which supports a constructive discussion 
of strengths and weaknesses.
Educational Qualities
We assess the six cases in terms of disciplinary-aligned 
dimensions. The dimensions are derived from the course setup as 
a novel combination of designerly (creativity and aesthetics) and 
technical topics (AI/ML technology use) within design education. 
In this context, we find it important to look at both designerly 
and technical topics also in integration, i.e., how well are the 
teams able to find and develop links between them and express 
those in their designs (consistency/coherence of design). Finally, 
as part of our Master’s program, we want student teams to take 
an academic approach to designing with creativity and AI. That 
means, we assess their design and research process in terms of a 
balance between intuitive and enthusiastic pushing-forward, and 
a reflective and even critical approach to making sense of their 
design iterations, investigating starting points, development of 
momentum, pivots and turning points, and how the final design 
case emerges in the end. The detailed items are derived from 
the course rubrics, in essence, what we find important to teach 
our students–both to keep it open and sustainable in the light 
of technology development, and to direct and guide students in 
their development around a complex technology. The increasing 
numbering scheme does not imply order, it is merely a means to 
reference different aspects in an unambiguous way.
www.ijdesign.org 
7 
International Journal of Design Vol. 17 No. 2 2023
Y.-C. J. Huang, S. Wensveen, and M. Funk
The first dimension, creativity and aesthetics (CAx), deals 
with qualities of creativity and aesthetics that appear in a case. For 
creativity, we look at how novel a case is for the (CA1) intended 
context of use and (CA2) in conceptual focus. Further, we look 
at (CA3) diversity and contrast in combining different ideas in 
a case. Finally, (CA4) risk-taking based on personal inspiration 
and acquired knowledge of AI technology contributes to creativity. 
For aesthetic qualities, we look at (CA5) sensual quality, (CA6) 
new aesthetics, the (CA7) exploratory experience, and (CA8) 
how the designed experience augments the Everyday or how far 
it sketches a new world.
The second dimension, technology use (TUx), deals with 
(TU1) technological feasibility and practicality, but also (TU2) 
depth, i.e., whether AI/ML technology is basically applied or 
more deeply understood and incorporated, or even changed. In this 
context, we also look for how AI/ML technology is integrated into 
a larger technical ecosystem (TU3), which can take considerable 
resources and skills to accomplish, but also facilitates a better, 
more high-fidelity integrated experience in the end. Further, we 
are interested in (TU4) how student teams explore technologies, 
whether they settle quickly on a single solution or take the time 
to research, evaluate, and discuss alternatives. Finally, we look at 
(TU5) how appropriate the technology use is in the context of the 
design case, (TU6) how deep the conceptual need is for advanced 
technology, and (TU7) how the implementation corresponds to that, 
including how well ethical concerns are discussed.
The third dimension, consistency/coherence of design 
(CDx), focuses on (CD1) the interplay of creativity, aesthetics, 
and technology in the design case, considering whether there 
are clear connections between creativity and aesthetics, AI/ML 
technology, and whether this is reflected in (CD2) conceptual and 
(CD3) discursive qualities.
Finally, the fourth dimension, design and research 
process (DRPx), deals with explorative aspects, such as (DRP1) 
how far beyond user-centered design the case is, (DRP2) 
whether post-human interaction is explored, and (DRP3) 
whether multiple perspectives are explored and presented, next 
to (DRP4) the degree of curiosity that inspires and drives the 
exploration. Another quality is risk-taking in the process, (DRP5) 
breaking the fourth wall or (DRP6) permitting meta-level 
aspects in the work, and (DRP7) whether there is an account of 
interacting with unpredictable actors (possible in relation to 
post-human interaction). Further, we are interested in how far the 
student teams (DRP8) explore by making and then deploy their 
demonstrators into a real-life context (as far as possible given the 
degree of futurism). This is complemented by a final focus on 
the process, (DRP9) whether the team primarily pays attention to 
process or final outcomes. With these qualities and structuring 
dimensions as a background, we present six design cases and 
use the qualities to pinpoint highlights in the students’ work. The 
cases are presented in pairs of two, ordered by their conceptual 
being-removed-from the status quo.
Two Cases Indicating Conventional AI Futures
Conventional AI Futures deal with a modest extrapolation of the 
current Everyday, in which AI products or services are integrated. 
This category essentially takes the world as we know it and focuses 
on enhancing it with AI, which is a conceptually low-risk approach. 
However, it invites more scrutiny in terms of conceptual consistency 
and coherence. Conventional AI futures stay close to the modus 
operandi of designing products and services, just with AI.
Case 1: Robby: Conversational Agent as a 
Language Teacher
The first case is Robby, a conversational agent with a physical 
embodiment that supports people in learning a foreign language 
through conversational interactions. To engage people in a 
conversation, this work incorporates emotional feedback 
and provides corresponding responses, and facial and body 
expressions while people make distinct types of errors (e.g., 
grammar errors, wrong context, wrong pronunciation, etc.). 
This project found inspiration in the combination of the topics 
Human-AI Collaboration and Aesthetics of Interaction.
Figure 1. Sequence of different scenarios of Robby giving emotional feedback to a user.
www.ijdesign.org 
8 
International Journal of Design Vol. 17 No. 2 2023
Experiential Speculation in Vision-Based AI Design Education: Designing Conventional and Progressive AI Futures
The concept shows qualities of being a sensible application, 
being useful for supporting a difficult activity (CD2, CD3), yet 
implementing new ways to do so (CA8). Although the team did 
not advance far into making and realizing a working prototype 
(TU1, TU2), they consistently focused on embodiment besides 
a computer or smart phone (DRP8), and on embedding machine 
learning technology in a tight interaction loop (TU3, CD1). They 
used emotional expressions as a feedback modality (CA7, CA7), 
engaging the user in a fluent interaction sequence with little 
processing-related friction. The concept also allows for extension 
into more useful applications (CD2), in which the embodiment 
would become a sidecar to a conversation with another human 
or application, while providing continuous feedback. This already 
hints at the critique that this case did not make large conceptual 
jumps in the process (CA1, CA2, CA4), the focus was and 
remained on solving a particular problem (DRP1, DRP3), and 
thus did not open to creative influence (CA3). A second critical 
point is that the technological grounding is not convincing: while 
speech to text technology exists, understanding and providing 
constructive feedback on contextual errors or dealing with heavy 
pronunciation issues is currently not solved in the state of the art of 
machine learning (TU1, TU2). A final point of critique is that the 
emotional responses are rather crude and follow a very reductive 
model of human emotion expression (TU6), which might not even 
be appropriate for an artificial agent to peruse (TU7).
Case 2: CAENA: Enchant the Dining Experience 
using Spatial AR and AI
The second case, CAENA, aims to create an enchanting dining 
experience using spatial Augmented Reality and Artificial 
Intelligence. The final concept is a system that enhances a dining 
experience with personalized projections by leveraging users’ 
personal and environment data before, during, and after the dining 
event. This project combines Everyday aesthetics and  Interactive 
Machine Learning technology to create AI-generated elements 
that visually complement the dining experience. A mobile app 
is used to set personal preferences before dining and for giving 
feedback to the system throughout and after the experience.
The concept is realized as a combination of different 
technologies, including hardware, software, and interface and 
smart phone application (TU1, TU3). The team chose appropriate 
technology (TU5) and found a conceptually consistent form of 
enhancing the physical dining experience through projections 
(CA5, CA8, CD1). Critical points for this case are around the 
lack of depth in the engagement with AI/ML technology (TU2, 
TU6), and how the interplay between creativity, aesthetics, and 
technology (CD1, CD2) contributes to a rather unsurprising 
experience (CA5, CA6). A second point is that the role of 
augmented reality in this concept is not well-accentuated and could 
have been designed with more curiosity and risk-taking (CA3, 
CA4, DRP7). Finally, the concept stays at a problem-solving 
user-centered developmental stage (DRP1) forgoing more 
interesting opportunities (DRP3, DRP4, DRP9) in enhancing a 
dinner experience with unpredictability (DRP7) or meta-level 
engagements (DRP6).
In summary, the two conventional AI futures cases show 
that more attention to the design and research process was needed. 
This way, more diversity and curiosity create bigger leaps in 
conceptual development combining creativity, aesthetics, and 
technology in more surprising ways.
Two Cases Indicating AI Future In Between
The next two cases indicate an in-between stage between 
conventional AI futures and progressive, visionary views of what 
else we could design. Like the first two cases, we see cases that 
can in principle be realized in the current Everyday, however, 
noting that the following two cases take steps into a different, 
future affirming, conceptual framing of the Everyday.
Figure 2. CAENA creates a visually augmented dining experience by using an integrated system. 
www.ijdesign.org 
9 
International Journal of Design Vol. 17 No. 2 2023
Y.-C. J. Huang, S. Wensveen, and M. Funk
Case 3: Breakfast Soundscape: Exploring Aesthetics 
of the Auditory Environment
The third case, Breakfast Soundscape2, aims to combine the 
insights of everyday aesthetics, extended reality, and generative 
models for sound exploration. This work presents a prototype that 
augments everyday food consumption practices with a unique 
soundscape that is experienced, e.g., while eating breakfast. 
Tableware and cutlery are digitally enhanced to record movements 
and translate them into fitting soundscapes. This potentially 
creates an unusual experience to de-familiarize the user from 
the mundane, familiar Everyday. While this case resembles the 
enhanced dining experience in case 2, the core sensual practice 
of consuming food is changed through the soundscape in rather 
disruptive ways.
The concept capitalizes on the unusual interplay between 
natural acoustic and artificial digital sounds produced in the 
process of preparing and consuming food, as well as the mixing 
of physical and digital realm, creating a new, focused experience 
(CA1, CA2). The design realizes sensual qualities and new 
aesthetics (CA5, CA6), and potentially leads to exploratory 
experiences, especially on first encounters of this experience 
augmentation (CA7, CA8). The project was technically feasible 
and resulted in working prototypes (TU1, TU2), but it was not 
further integrated into a larger ecosystem of applications. The 
use of technology was appropriate and in accordance with a 
conceptual need (TU5, TU6). While the team focused on the 
interplay between creativity, aesthetics, and technology (CD1), 
and this is reflected in the concept (CD2), there was little 
discourse and reflection on the implications for the future. The 
design process emphasizes working with curiosity (DRP4) and a 
focus on making (DRP8), especially using intermediate internal 
tools to make sense of interaction and use. There was also a focus 
on early, physical prototypes and on the final outcomes (DRP9), 
yet little self-reflection.
Case 4: Transire, an Exploration to Ease up the 
Grieving Process
The fourth project, Transire3, explores a tangible artefact that 
allows people in mourning to maintain a connection with the lost 
one and ease through the grieving process. The project features 
a multi-modal, partly visual, partly tactile, experience that 
embodies a contemporary interpretation of self, soul, and being. 
The designers outlined a connected service around the experience 
that would facilitate data collection from social media and use 
machine learning to predict the personality of the deceased. Based 
on the personality, the aesthetics of interaction through light, 
color, and movement would change accordingly. The concept 
found inspiration in the topics perceptual-crossing, aesthetic 
interaction, data programming, and machine learning all with a 
strong emphasis on physical visualization.
This project touches on the complexity of letting go and 
grasping at what it is that we (think we) let go. This has been 
explored before in contemporary artworks (Houser, 2020), but 
not deeply in the design context (CA1). The team took risks in 
engaging with the difficult topic of death and grief (CA4) through 
a sensual experience with the artefact (CA5). While following 
a making approach (DRP8), the technology choices regarding 
the content acquisition and generative AI are less clearly 
articulated, especially when dealing with arbitrary data sources 
that are meant to provide all information needed to generate a 
truthful, recognizable representation of the deceased (TU3). The 
appropriateness of a technological solution is questionable, and 
the work does not fully correspond to the many ethical concerns 
that could be raised about the chosen topic (TU5, TU7). The 
design shows an interplay between creativity, aesthetics, and 
technology (CD1) and this is followed through in the concept 
to some extent (CD2). While focusing on individual end-users, 
there is a notion of post-human interaction present (DRP2) with 
possible implications on “breaking the fourth wall” and facilitating 
metalevel reflection (DRP5, DRP6).
In summary, the two intermediate AI futures cases show 
more focus on personal experiences and depth in empathizing 
with the Everyday or a special life situation like mourning. The 
two projects demonstrate very different forms of impact, also at 
the emotional level, and how the interplay between AI technology 
and creativity and aesthetics can enhance different situations. 
They also show that more attention to the design and research 
process in terms of proactive reflection and critical engagement 
with their concepts could have helped realize more coherent 
concepts–and that a grounding of speculative design in ethics is 
and should be a paramount concern in design education.
Figure 3. Breakfast Soundscape augments breakfast eating experience with a unique soundscape in everyday practice. 
www.ijdesign.org 
10 
International Journal of Design Vol. 17 No. 2 2023
Experiential Speculation in Vision-Based AI Design Education: Designing Conventional and Progressive AI Futures
Two Cases Detailing Progressive Visions
The final two cases are firmly rooted in the future; they are 
progressive in terms of reframing the way people view their 
identity in public spaces or fostering personal relationships with 
non-human entities. Yet, they are neutral about the future context, 
utopia or dystopia.
Case 5: Iden: Using Generative Models for Public 
Privacy in the Hybrid Space
The fifth project, Iden4, aims to address public privacy issues in 
a hybrid space. This work presents a concept of an independent 
company that protects people’s identity from being revealed in 
unwanted situations. This company would search online for 
uploaded videos to identify clients who wear their identifiers 
and then replace their client’s identity in the online video with 
the client’s self-selected anonymized version. This work invites 
participants to experience a what-if imaginary scenario by using 
visionary videos highlighting the socio-cultural values of the 
characters in the video and their reasons for privacy and identity. 
The videos were accompanied by a website for the imaginary 
company and used interviews to understand the perception of 
participants on this speculative future. The project also touches 
on sensitive issues around the generative model being used for 
the hybrid identity creation. This concept was inspired by the 
combination of topics Human values and Generative models.
The concept is scoped larger than previous projects, as a company 
instead of a single product or application. There is strong emphasis 
on novelty in context and conceptual focus (CA1, CA2) as well 
as elements of diversity and risk-taking (CA3, CA4) by boldly 
Figure 4. Transire explores a tangible artefact that enables people to interact with the deceased one.
Figure 5. Iden discusses sensitive issues around a hybrid identity generated by a future company.
www.ijdesign.org 
11 
International Journal of Design Vol. 17 No. 2 2023
Y.-C. J. Huang, S. Wensveen, and M. Funk
projecting a future scenario that might be entirely invalidated by 
future developments. The visual qualities of the concept video 
are particularly striking in how the team explores new aesthetics 
of worn identities (CA5, CA6). The concept challenges us with 
a new perspective on the future identity-augmented Everyday 
(CA8, CA9). As far as explored, technology use is appropriate 
and requires broad integration (TU3, TU5). The technology 
directly responds to an ethical issue at the heart of the project 
(TU7). The team explored multiple perspectives (DRP3), worked 
with curiosity, and attempted to break the fourth wall for the 
co-speculator (DRP4, DRP5). We also see traces of engaging 
with uncertainty and unpredictable actors in this work (DRP7). 
As a speculative project, there is much less focus on feasibility, 
scalability, integration with other technologies, and technological 
depth compared to the projects presented above. Also, the 
interplay between creativity, aesthetics, and technology was less 
developed. Conceptually, the design team focused on provocation 
and facilitating a discourse around identity (CD3), identifiability, 
and the (future) state of privacy in the public.
Case 6: Bird Whisperer
The sixth project, Bird Whisperer5, takes a more-than-human 
approach and targets interrelations between people and birds. 
The team designed a research artefact, an object that outputs bird 
songs produced by a generative algorithm (e.g., WaveGAN6) 
with the objective to explore new ways of living and investigate 
relationships between humans, artificial objects, and non-human 
entities (i.e., birds). This concept was inspired by the combination 
of topics Post-humanism and Generative models.
The concept played with the novelty of human-bird 
communication (DRP2) both for the target context and as a concept 
(CA1, CA2). The team took risks in their deployment (CA4, DRP7) 
and in how the concept augments the experience of the Everyday 
with new aesthetics (CA6, CA8). Unlike the previous speculative 
project, this project was realized as a working prototype and 
deployed in the wild (TU1, TU2). The team capitalized on their 
strong making skills and actively sought expert help throughout 
the process (DRP8), exploring different appropriate technologies 
(TU4, TU5). The project shows an interesting animal interaction 
approach, yet the team missed opportunities for deeper reflection 
on how the AI aspects, specifically the GAN, relate to and have 
shaped the post-human design approach.
In summary, the two progressive AI futures cases show 
diversity in how a team could approach speculative futures in 
this learning context. Both projects are conceptually deep, self-
contained, and consistent, while taking liberties in assuming 
the world around the direct conceptual scope. It is interesting to 
note the differences in using AI technology in either speculation 
or making. The projects share commonalities like a strongly 
connected team, active reflection in teamwork, and following 
through on an initial ambitious idea instead of relying on 
intermediate pivots.
Discussion
We first reflect on our approach and compare the course design with 
other education approaches. Then, we discuss the implementation 
of the course and the limitations of our approach.
Figure 6. Bird Whisperer explores a novel interrelation between people and birds.
www.ijdesign.org 
12 
International Journal of Design Vol. 17 No. 2 2023
Experiential Speculation in Vision-Based AI Design Education: Designing Conventional and Progressive AI Futures
Reflection on the Approach
To our knowledge, we are pioneering a vision-first design exploration 
approach in an elective Master course in a design program. The AI 
context and related expectations of students and staff on experiential 
artefacts made this a challenge after all: first, we had only few 
education resources to consult. Second, we leave the learning 
environment open-ended, which enables not only students but also 
teachers to embrace uncertainty during the process. Third, it is a 
fundamentally challenging approach to allow students to bring their 
own baggage into the course. Instead of viewing students as blank 
slates that need to be filled with knowledge, we value and build upon 
students’ diverse strengths, skills, and perspectives. Therefore, we 
created multi-disciplinary teams to guide the student teams towards 
interesting results and satisfying learning experiences.
Figure 7 shows the evolution of the course design process. 
The course started with exploring the inspiration of the disciplinary 
overlap between Data & Intelligence and Creativity & Aesthetics 
and kept the visionary focus as an implicit criterion (Figure 7, left 
side). We specified 12 topics, which are indicated as blue or pink 
circles in each discipline. Each topic has sufficient depth to set the 
student teams on a strongly conceptual process with experiential 
results. Later, the exploration moved toward further development 
and vision-based design with selected disciplinary components. In 
the end, design discussions and decisions became more explicitly 
informed by Personal Inspiration & Vision (Figure 7, right side). 
While our approach at the highest level aligns with the Attitude, 
Skills, Knowledge (ASK) model, we argue for a translation for 
research-based design education, tailored to advanced students 
facing a complex socio-technical problem space: we translate 
attitude to perspectives, skills to practices, and knowledge to 
concepts (PPC). The resulting PPC model can be traced in our 
design decisions on the course content, execution, and assessment. 
For instance, we aim to provide our students with perspectives on 
AI in a future society that link to a strong expression of values. We 
assign practice-based learning activities to develop essential skills 
in prototyping with AI technologies, in which we want students 
not only to align their directions of deepening to their own learning 
goals, but also to steer the depth to which they navigate as teams. 
Finally, we provide our students with central knowledge concepts 
on creativity and aesthetics, and AI/ML technology use, to allow 
them to navigate the design space confidently. Students can then 
decide to go further in a particular direction to build expertise that 
is intentionally beyond the curriculum.
In addition, our post-course findings showed that our 
approach was successful beyond case analysis. Students’ self-
reflections revealed that this course and process have broadened 
their perspectives and equipped them with the ability to engage 
in meaningful discussion on relevant topics. As one student 
indicated, “...this course has broadened my sense of the multitude of 
perspectives...I now am able to take part in discussions surrounding 
the topic in a more meaningful manner.” Another student reported 
that the approach has transformed their way of managing complexity, 
“...This process has been enlightening to my own approach on 
working with complexity...” Moreover, students found that our 
approach, particularly in relation to the poster-making activities, 
facilitated them to explore new concepts and technologies. It also 
enhanced their comprehension of theoretical concepts from both 
philosophical and technical aspects. They then were able to apply the 
newly acquired knowledge in practice, as reflected in the comment, 
“...In the short duration of this course, ...we were able to quickly 
explore, and get a sense of theoretical concepts (both philosophical 
and technical), and therefore utilize GAN models despite the fact 
that most of us do not have any prior knowledge on this subject...” 
These evidences showed the successful aspects of this approach.
Comparison of Different Approaches to Teaching 
Design with AI
We compare our approach to existing AI design education 
approaches, which are divided into four categories based on nine 
dimensions (see Table 1, our approach in highlighted cells). The 
first category, adapted CS/ML programs, focuses on education 
approaches that are grounded in computer science or artificial 
intelligence curricula, and that let design students approach AI/ML 
methods and tools in a simplified and narrowed-down way, e.g., 
by using Python as a comparatively easy-to-learn programming 
language with readymade datasets, models, and example cases for 
classification or clustering: 
While designers probably won’t become machine learning 
engineers after taking one course, it gives them the opportunity 
to get comfortable with using data, learn how to set and improve 
algorithms, and understand the output enough to be able to evaluate 
any performance problems. (Andersen, 2019, para. 9)
Such programs aim to teach fundamentals of AI/ML and often follow 
the traditional structure of technical artificial intelligence programs, 
certainly taking short-cuts, but with the objective to provide designers 
Figure 7. The course started from the disciplinary overlap toward vision-based design with selected disciplinary components.
www.ijdesign.org 
13 
International Journal of Design Vol. 17 No. 2 2023
Y.-C. J. Huang, S. Wensveen, and M. Funk
with a mechanistic understanding of the technology, where it can be 
applied, where not, and facing which risks. A second category, user-
centered with UI/UX focus, is grounded in UI/UX design curricula 
addressing AI/ML application as a levelled-up challenge from 
existing digital applications to design for. This category may follow 
industrial trends of gradually involving and integrating machine 
learning in consumer and business application across sectors. On 
the one hand, design guidelines for AI/ML cater to the perspective 
of extending existing design briefs with AI, and to some extent can 
help with the decision making. On the other hand, education in this 
category focuses comparatively much on data visualization, dataful 
interfaces, and UI-mediated decision-making based on uncertain 
information. Third, the artistic design with AI/ML tools category 
focuses most on the creative industry and deals with art and design 
education in the sense of “those who get hands-on experience with 
AI while in school will have a better understanding of its creative 
possibilities as well as its ethical implications on culture and society” 
(Andersen, 2019). Educators in this space 
[…] feel it’s important for artists, designers, and other creative 
people to have a seat at the table and figure out what AI systems 
can do, what risks they entail, and have the willingness to express 
the possibilities they afford and predict the future by starting to use 
them as early as we can. (Andersen, 2019)
This education puts students’ creativity and vision first, supplying 
them with a curated set of tools for expression: students “[…] 
will survey the history and theories behind today’s creative AI, 
analyze the unorthodox approaches that have advanced the field, 
and experience cutting-edge creative AI tools” (Lim, 2022). AI/ML 
technology is explored in making and more in what it can produce 
than what it is and how it works. Deconstruction of AI/ML tools 
and black box technology is accepted when it serves concrete 
individual expression, not for knowledge gain as such. Fourth, the 
category of experiential ML-based speculation takes an entirely 
different creative approach to AI/ML design education: here, design 
education takes a technology-speculative turn towards the general 
capabilities of currently emerging or near-future AI/ML technology. 
In this approach, design activities not necessarily engage with 
AI/ML technology in making, but in consideration, speculation, 
critique, and reflection with a strong societal and ethical focus.
Based on the above overview, we have visualized our own 
approach as a combination of highlighted cells in Table 1. For instance, 
we combined a creativity first, design for expression approach with 
open-ended ideation and speculation, followed by experiential 
making; for the employed AI/ML technology, we provided a broad 
introduction, then converging to specific models and algorithms. In 
other words, our approach introduced a broad spectrum of available 
techniques, and design students selected and deepened on their own. 
The envisioned outcomes can be artistic results of creative making 
with AI/ML technology or more descriptive artefacts; audience 
experience and engagement are key to high quality outcomes. 
Moreover, design students focused on selected target users or 
societal actors, drawing from personal inspiration or related research. 
We employed selected data science and ML tools, open-source/
academic, self-built at the beginning and allowed for self-directed 
tool choice and presentation approach depending on the design 
direction: ideation tools, conceptual design tools, low-fi prototyping, 
anything-goes. We also valued the expression of design qualities 
and creativity more than applicability or algorithmic innovation or 
originality. The AI/ML technology and concrete making techniques 
were present throughout the design process, including frequent 
(moderated) moments of reflection and critique.
Table 1. Comparison between four approaches. Our approach is provided in the highlighted cells. 
Adapted CS / ML programs
User-centered, UI/UX focus
Artistic design with ML tools
Experiential ML-based 
speculation
Approach
Model/algorithm first, design 
for application
Application first, design for 
users
Creativity first, design for 
expression
Open-ended ideation and 
speculation, followed by 
experiential making
AI/ML  
Technology
Broad introduction, then 
converging to specific 
models and algorithms
Specific to application, limited
Specific to tools, limited
Unspecified, open, or does not 
matter
Outcomes
Computational notebooks, 
Python, limited interactive 
prototypes
GUI wireframes and 
prototypes, mobile apps
Artistic designs, art-works, 
installations
Descriptive, non-interactive 
artifacts, movies, scenarios
Design focus
Technology
User
Artistic directions
Personal inspiration
Clients
Research
Commercial
Personal/Societal
Societal
Education 
tools
Selected data science and  
ML tools, open-source/
academic, self-built
UI/UX design tools, prototyping 
applications, commercial
Generative and creativity 
support tools, open-source/
academic
Ideation tools, conceptual 
design tools, low-fi 
prototyping, anything-goes
Education 
style
Lecture-based, content-driven
Coaching-based,  
application-driven
Show and tell, open-ended, 
explorative
Self-directed, open-ended, 
explorative
Assessment 
criteria
AI knowledge and skills
Design qualities
Creativity
Applicability
Creativity and 
Aesthetics 
Limited, not a focus
Yes, beginning of process
Yes, various parts of process
Yes, entire process
www.ijdesign.org 
14 
International Journal of Design Vol. 17 No. 2 2023
Experiential Speculation in Vision-Based AI Design Education: Designing Conventional and Progressive AI Futures
Returning to our education vision, it is important to note that 
we are not teaching AI, but teaching with AI. We use AI as a carrier 
to understand what students learned from this course, arriving at 
a new understanding of AI embedded in design education: We 
propose to extend the educational design space with respect to AI 
and ML. As we have explained in the beginning and also in Table 1, 
design educators have by now several options to build a “Design + 
AI” curriculum, from following the rationale of Computer Science 
education to more conceptual education to tools-based education. 
Each of these options projects underlying concepts, educational 
needs, and educational techniques into the curriculum. While we 
acknowledge the merits of building onto established foundations 
or using ready-made tools and materials, we embrace openness 
for outcome, invite complexity of AI technology, appreciate 
technology depth, and define dimensions for teaching with AI. Our 
vision-first approach has shown that creativity can happen as a 
diverse form at different stages in the process.
Vision-Based Futuring Landscape
The six design cases have been assessed separately on the 
four dimensions (i.e., creativity and aesthetics, technology 
use, consistency/coherence of design, and design & research 
process) in a previous section of this paper. When we now plot 
the six concepts in relation to each other on the three levels of 
aesthetic value (low to high) and along a time axis that runs from 
conventional futures towards more progressive futures, we see a 
landscape with different horizons (see Figure 8).
This landscape can help to answer our question: “How will the 
new AI technologies and data influence the aesthetics of intelligent 
products, services, and systems?” It shows three visions: 
• Creating new sensory experiences: for example, a 
conversational agent that detects language mistakes and 
generates emotional reactions to smoothen the language learning 
experience, or an enchantment of a dining experience using spatial 
augmented reality and generating personalized projections. 
• Beyond creating a sensory experience: the use of AI 
technology can lead to new conceptual designs for everyday 
experiences. For example, Breakfast Soundscape creates 
a new auditory experience for the user. Beyond that, it can 
also be viewed as a new conceptual framing of the everyday 
life of non-human agents, i.e., breakfast objects, such as a 
knife, plate, and cup, that have a certain independence of 
their user and of physical reality. Transire is a new concept 
for the grieving experience; a digital service that collects 
social media data about a deceased person and uses machine 
learning to generate a synthetic personality. This personality 
is embodied in a new conceptual product, exhibiting an 
enhanced experience of grief.
• Critical reflections and a new discourse on ways of living: 
this vision is beyond showing new concepts and sensory 
experiences. Iden is designed as more than a new concept, 
but as an example of a product-service system within a 
larger system including a commercial company, multiple 
creators-consumers with conflicting values, and operating 
both in the physical and virtual domain. The project critically 
reflects on the commercialization of public-virtual privacy 
and personal identity in hybrid space made possible through 
different AI technologies. The Bird Whisperer project explores 
the sensory experience of AI-generated bird songs and 
proposes a new design concept for an everyday experience 
of relating to local birds. However, the real aesthetic value 
Figure 8. Vision-based futuring landscape maps out six design cases, from conventional concepts to progressive concepts. 
www.ijdesign.org 
15 
International Journal of Design Vol. 17 No. 2 2023
Y.-C. J. Huang, S. Wensveen, and M. Funk
of the project is in avoiding human-centered design and 
instead discussing the interrelations between human agents, 
artificial agents, and biological agents (i.e., birds) and in the 
exploration of post-human issues around nature-cultures, 
uncertainty, and care.
The question of “How will the aesthetic values of designers 
influence the use of intelligence?” is harder to answer. From the 
annotated posters and the written reflections, we do see that most 
students’ personal aesthetics and values have influenced (elements 
of) the final design and the use of intelligence. But, as each team 
consisted of four designers, it is hard to see clear relations on 
how their values had an influence. The relations that are clear are 
perhaps also obvious: those with an interest in speculative design, 
science fiction, and post-human design explore the third horizon, 
those with more conventional or less defined values tend to stay 
closer to the first horizon. 
Reflection on the Implementation
We have found several challenges on the implementation of 
this course, including uncertainty, timing of introducing new 
knowledge, and coaching direction. Due to the novelty of this 
approach, we faced challenges in dealing with uncertainty about 
choosing and preparing learning materials, deciding on open-ended 
target outcomes, and how to achieve the best outcomes through 
the deliverables. More importantly, which assessment criteria and 
methods would guide students towards the best outcomes. We do 
not know the answer yet and we, as teachers, are still learning 
from the courses over time.
The timing and the format of introducing new knowledge 
are difficult to determine. To cover diverse topics, ranging from 
well-known topics to new ones, we selected several topics with 
corresponding papers from both CA and MDC disciplines. If 
introduced too early, students might not be able to relate topics 
and their own ideas. If too late, the new knowledge might not fit 
the progress of the design process or delay it.
While we provided extensive materials, support, coaching, 
and facilities, students could not always translate this into a 
process of expected intensity. We observed gaps between the 
complexity of their concepts and the feasibility of the state-of-the-
art technology: students struggled in finding a balance between 
creativity and feasibility towards a convincing futuring story. In 
the future, we expect to see more creativity to fill this gap and 
students deepening critical aspects of their concepts to envision 
progressive visions. 
In this course, we chose 10-12 diverse knowledge concepts 
for the two distinct areas. For instance, we focused on a broader 
range of MDC topics than only machine learning, looking at data 
collection, crowdsourcing, data augmentation, and symbolic AI. 
Ultimately, however, students converged to machine learning 
related topics (e.g., generative models, or interactive machine 
learning) driven by their interests and a strong sense of relevance. 
In terms of CA topics, students converged on established and 
easy-to-grasp topics of Everyday Aesthetics and Aesthetics of 
Interaction. These topics were used for integration and reflection 
for Case 1, 2, 3, and 4 (Horizon 1 and 2). The more fundamental 
topic of Human Values and contemporary topic of Post-Human 
Design were used in Case 5 and 6 (Horizon 3) respectively. 
Overall, it appears that CA topics strongly influenced the horizon 
of the final design. 
Limitations
This paper presents a case study with six exemplars of an 
education design and course structure supporting experiential 
speculation with AI. While this approach works well in the 
context of our educational system, it might not work well in 
other educational contexts. In our program, design students 
have developed knowledge and skills from both CA and MDC 
areas. Moreover, challenge-based learning is a common mode 
of education, which suits a self-directed learning style for open-
ended societal problems. To apply this course design in other 
contexts, operational modifications and programmatic adaptations 
might be needed to integrate well with prior learning activities.
We want to acknowledge the heterogeneous student 
population with diverse skills, backgrounds, and learning goals. 
The course catered to this particular population, and at the 
same time relied on it setting the bar relatively high regarding 
conceptual design skills, experiential making, technological 
learning ability, and research mindset. Similarly, the lecturer team 
had different backgrounds in design, engineering, and computer 
science, and essentially never taught together in this setup. It is 
fair to say that the mixed backgrounds of students and teachers 
were very important to the success of the course. 
We could expect a reasonable chance of success for the 
chosen approach because the targeted student population is 
heterogeneous and consists of students with various interests, from 
AI and ML technology or user-focused design, to storytelling and 
futuring approaches. This, and our nudges towards mixed, diverse, 
and inclusive teams led us to expect successful operationalizations 
of the approach in education: students would formulate and follow 
their own learning goals in their team’s context and contribute a 
variety of skills and knowledge to the design cases. This, however, 
cannot be expected as a given in other design education contexts. 
Other design programs might deal with a far more homogeneous 
population, with less interests in getting the machine-learning 
components to work, with exploring and creatively realizing an 
initially vague vision. 
We have recognized that students lacking knowledge, 
design experience, and attitudes were struggling with this 
approach. These students got a conceptual understanding of how 
AI works in theory and know the limitations of AI in general 
but could not translate this to a conceptual design of AI concrete 
enough to be implemented in practice. To resolve this issue in 
the future, enrolment prerequisites for the course and explicitly 
guiding the development of narrative design concepts and their 
practical implementation might be appropriate measures. Also, 
we could investigate diverse ways of introducing designers to 
emerging design materials, facilitating more in-depth discussion 
and learning around topics, and restricting the cope of technology 
to prevent student teams from getting lost in exploring the 
complex technology.
www.ijdesign.org 
16 
International Journal of Design Vol. 17 No. 2 2023
Experiential Speculation in Vision-Based AI Design Education: Designing Conventional and Progressive AI Futures
Conclusion and Future Work
Artificial Intelligence will change how designers design, what 
they design, and why they design. This paper presents two 
primary contributions. 
First, we contribute an alternative approach to extend AI 
education in design beyond teaching AI concepts and AI practices 
by integrating personal and societal perspectives, and focus on 
the creativity and aesthetics of designing-with AI. We discuss the 
design opportunities of our approach compared to other education 
approaches. We invite design educators to consider the existing and 
our alternative approach (Table 1) for AI design education and draw 
inspiration from our implementation and the exemplary outcomes.
What does this consideration mean for AI education 
integration in a design program? The breadth and depth, and rapid 
development of AI and ML technologies can be challenging to 
keep abreast of in technical education. Much less so, in a design 
program. As responsible design educators, our role is to distill the 
essential AI/ML concepts and practices for design, contextualizing 
them in a societal and personal perspective. This takes time and 
multiple iterations. We present our choice for AI concepts and 
practices, and invite other design educators to explore and share 
their own iterations and alternatives of teaching AI in design. 
Second, we contribute a novel futuring landscape with a 
first set of AI design exemplars that could be used to facilitate 
designers in envisioning possible scenarios from conventional 
futures toward progressive futures and discussing the aesthetic 
values of these concepts at various levels. We invite design 
researchers to further populate the futuring landscape with their 
exemplars, and jointly explore values and visions for the future.
In this paper, we showcase examples of what designers 
design relating to why they design, and we discuss how the 
futuring landscape could be used to support the exploration of 
the possible design scenarios with data and AI technologies. 
However, we consider the complex topic of how designers design 
when using data and AI as design materials to be outside the scope 
of this paper. Further research is needed to delve into the methods 
or tools that facilitate designing with AI with the integration of 
creativity and aesthetics, and to shed more light on the underlying 
qualities and principles of aesthetics of intelligence.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank all the students who have contributed 
to the Creativity and Aesthetics of Data and AI (DCM210) 
course, especially the 1st generation (Spring 2021) whose work 
we are showing in this paper. We would also like to express our 
appreciation to the Department of Industrial Design at Eindhoven 
University of Technology for providing us with the environment 
to realize our education vision in practice.
Endnotes
1. In the paper, when we use ‘designing-with AI’ we refer to AI 
in the broad sense including its technologies, tools, and the 
related concepts.
2. Video of Case 3: Breakfast Soundscape. https://youtu.be/
xTHDVC10j4Y
3. Video of Case 4: Transire. https://youtu.be/Hn0resIjdVU
4. Video of Case 5: Iden. https://www.iden-ai.nl/
5. Video of Case 6: Bird Whisperer. https://vimeo.com/530194266
6. WaveGAN. https://github.com/chrisdonahue/wavegan
References 
1. Abdul, A., Vermeulen, J., Wang, D., Lim, B. Y., & 
Kankanhalli, M. (2018). Trends and trajectories for 
explainable, accountable and intelligible systems: An HCI 
research agenda. In Proceedings of the CHI conference 
on human factors in computing systems (Article No. 582). 
ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3174156
2. Amershi, S., Cakmak, M., Knox, W. B., & Kulesza, T. 
(2014, Dec. 22). Power to the people: The role of humans 
in interactive machine learning. AI Magazine. https://doi.
org/10.1609/aimag.v35i4.2513
3. Andersen, M. (2019, Oct. 17). How design schools are keeping 
up with AI and machine learning. https://xd.adobe.com/ideas/
principles/emerging-technology/ai-education-in-design/
4. Bansal, G., Wu, T., Zhou, J., Fok, R., Nushi, B., Kamar, E., 
Ribeiro, M. T., & Weld, D. (2021). Does the whole exceed 
its parts? The effect of AI explanations on complementary 
team performance. In Proceedings of the CHI conference 
on human factors in computing systems (pp. 1-16). ACM. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445717
5. Bakarman, A. A. (2005). Attitude, skill and knowledge: (Ask) a 
new model for design education. In Proceedings of the 2nd CDEN 
design conference on design education, innovation, and practice 
(pp. 1-7). CEEA. https://doi.org/10.24908/pceea.v0i0.3894
6. Bowers, J. (2012). The logic of annotated portfolios: 
Communicating the value of ‘research through design’. In 
Proceedings of the designing interactive systems conference 
(pp. 68-77). ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/2317956.2317968 
7. Brennan, K., & Resnick, M. (2012). New frameworks for studying 
and assessing the development of computational thinking. In 
Proceedings of the annual meeting of the American educational 
research association (Vol. 1, pp. 1-25). Scientific Research.
8. Bridle, J. (2011). The new aesthetic: Waving at the machines. 
Retrieved 
from 
https://booktwo.org/notebook/waving-at-
machines/https://booktwo.org/notebook/waving-at-machines/
9. Cartwright, A. (2016). Invisible design: Co-designing with 
machines. 
https://medium.com/swlh/invisible-design-co-
designing-with-machines-aea62a1e0f6d
10. Deckers, E., Lévy, P., Wensveen, S., Ahn, R., & Overbeeke, 
K. (2012). Designing for perceptual crossing: Applying and 
evaluating design notions. International Journal of Design, 
6(3), 41-55.
11. Djajadiningrat, J. P., Overbeeke, C. J., & Wensveen, S. A. 
G. (2000). Augmenting fun and beauty: A pamphlet. In 
Proceedings of the conference on designing augmented 
reality environments (pp. 131-134). ACM. https://doi.
org/10.1145/354666.354680
www.ijdesign.org 
17 
International Journal of Design Vol. 17 No. 2 2023
Y.-C. J. Huang, S. Wensveen, and M. Funk
12. Dubberly, H., & Pangaro, P. (2015). Cybernetics and design: 
Conversations for action. In T. Fischer & C. M. Herr (eds.), 
Design cybernetics (pp. 85-99). Springer.
13. Dove, G., Halskov, K., Forlizzi, J., & Zimmerman, J. (2017). 
UX design innovation: Challenges for working with machine 
learning as a design material. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
conference on human factors in computing systems (pp.  278-
288). ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025739
14. Eco, U., & McEwen, A. (2004). History of beauty. Rizzoli.
15. Fiebrink, R. (2019). Machine learning education for artists, 
musicians, and other creative practitioners. ACM Transactions 
Computing Education, 19(4), Article 31. https://doi.
org/10.1145/3294008
16. Folkmann, M. N. (2013). The aesthetics of imagination in 
design. MIT Press.
17. Forlano, L. (2017). Posthumanism and design. She Ji: The 
Journal of Design, Economics, and Innovation, 3(1), 16-29. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sheji.2017.08.001
18. Foster, D. (2019). Generative deep learning. O’Reilly Media.
19. Hebron, P. (2016a). Machine learning for designers. 
O’Reilly Media.
20. Hebron, P. (2016b). Learning machines. http://www.
patrickhebron.com/learning-machines/
21. Holmquist, L. E. (2017). Intelligence on tap: Artificial 
intelligence as a new design material. Interactions, 24(4), 
28-33. https://doi.org/10.1145/3085571
22. Houser, K. (2020, Aug. 2). Watch a mother reunite with her 
deceased child in VR. Futurism. https://futurism.com/watch-
mother-reunion-deceased-child-vr 
23. Kaspersen, M. H. (2023). AI education that matters: 
Designing computationally empowering learning tools for 
machine learning (Doctoral dissertation). Aarhus Universitet. 
https://pure.au.dk/portal/da/publications/ai-education-that-
matters(a0a20fb0-fc3a-4ba6-8c37-469ab6f41d27).html
24. Kittur, A., Nickerson, J. V., Bernstein, M., Gerber, E., 
Shaw, A., Zimmerman, J., Lease, M., & Horton, J. (2013). 
The future of crowd work. In Proceedings of the 16th 
conference on computer supported cooperative work and 
social computing (pp. 1301-1318). ACM. https://doi.
org/10.1145/2441776.2441923
25. Lim, J. (2022). Artificial creativity [MOOC]. Coursera. 
https://www.coursera.org/learn/artificial-creativity
26. Petersen, M. G., Iversen, O. S., Krogh, P. G., & Ludvigsen, 
M. (2004). Aesthetic interaction: A pragmatist’s aesthetics of 
interactive systems. In Proceedings of the 5th conference on 
designing interactive systems (pp. 269-276). ACM. https://
doi.org/10.1145/1013115.1013153
27. Ramesh, D., Liu, A. Z., Echeverria, A. J., Song, J. Y., 
Waytowich, N. R., & Lasecki, W. S. (2020). Yesterday’s 
reward is today’s punishment: Contrast effects in human 
feedback to reinforcement learning agents. In Proceedings of 
the 19th international conference on autonomous agents and 
multiagent systems (pp. 1090-1097). ACM. https://dl.acm.
org/doi/10.5555/3398761.3398888 
28. Ratner, A., Sa, C. D., Wu, S., Selsam, D., & Ré, C. (2016). 
Data programming: Creating large training sets, quickly. In 
Proceedings of the 30th international conference on neural 
information processing systems (pp. 3574-3582). ACM.
29. Ross, P. R., & Wensveen, S. A. G. (2010). Designing behavior 
in interaction: Using aesthetic experience as a mechanism for 
design. International Journal of Design, 4(2), 3-13.
30. Schön, D. A. (1983). The reflective practitioner: How 
professionals think in action. Basic Books.
31. Steenson, M. W. (2017). Architectural intelligence: How 
designers and architects created the digital landscape. MIT Press.
32. Simon, H. A. (1969). The sciences of the artificial. MIT Press.
33. Subramonyam, H., Seifert, C., & Adar, E. (2021). Towards a 
process model for co-creating AI experiences. In Proceedings 
of the designing interactive systems conference (pp. 1529-
1543).  ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3461778.3462012
34. Treseler, M. (2017). Designing with data: Improving the user 
experience with a/b testing. O’Reilly Media.
35. Tschimmel, K. (2012). Design thinking as an effective toolkit 
for innovation. In Proceedings of the 13th conference on 
action for innovation: innovating from experience (pp.1-20). 
ISPIM. https://doi.org/10.13140/2.1.2570.3361
36. van Allen, P., & Hooker, B. (2017). ArtCenter college of 
design course: Internet of enlightened things. https://canvas.
instructure.com/courses/1111888
37. Vaughan, J. W. (2018). Making better use of the crowd: How 
crowdsourcing can advance machine learning research. The 
Journal of Machine Learning Research, 18(1), 7026-7071. 
38. Wang, D., Yang, Q., Abdul, A., & Lim, B. Y. (2019). 
Designing theory-driven user-centric explainable AI. In 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors 
in computing systems (Article No. 601). ACM. https://doi.
org/10.1145/3290605.3300831
39. Wensveen, S. A. G. (2018). Constructive design research. 
Technische Universiteit Eindhoven. https://research.tue.nl/
en/publications/constructive-design-research
40. Yang, Q. (2018). Machine learning as a UX design material: 
How can we imagine beyond automation, recommenders, 
and reminders? In Proceedings of the AAAI spring 
symposium series (pp. 1-6). Association for the Advancement 
of Artificial Intelligence.
41. Yang, Q. (2020). Designing AI products and services: 
An annotated syllabus. https://medium.com/design-of-ai-
products/design-of-ai-products-and-services-an-annotated-
syllabus-25f9511292a1
42. Yang, Q., Scuito, A., Zimmerman, J., Forlizzi, J., & Steinfeld, 
A. (2018). Investigating how experienced UX designers 
effectively work with machine learning. In Proceedings of 
the  designing interactive systems conference (pp. 585-596). 
ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3196709.3196730
43. Yang, Q., Steinfeld, A., Rosé, C., & Zimmerman, J. (2020). 
Re-examining whether, why, and how human-AI interaction 
is uniquely difficult to design. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
conference on human factors in computing systems (pp. 
1-13). ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376301
