Memory Manipulations in Extended Reality
Elise Bonnail
LTCI, INFRES, Telecom Paris, IP Paris
Palaiseau, France
elise.bonnail@telecom-paris.fr
Wen-Jie Tseng
LTCI, INFRES, Telecom Paris, IP Paris
Palaiseau, France
wen-jie.tseng@telecom-paris.fr
Mark McGill
University of Glasgow
Glasgow, Scotland, UK
mark.mcgill@glasgow.ac.uk
Eric Lecolinet
LTCI, INFRES, Telecom Paris, IP Paris
Palaiseau, France
eric.lecolinet@telecom-paris.fr
Samuel Huron
CNRS i3 (UMR 9217), SES, Telecom
Paris, IP Paris
Palaiseau, France
samuel.huron@telecom-paris.fr
Jan Gugenheimer
TU Darmstadt
Darmstadt, Germany
LTCI, INFRES, Telecom Paris, IP Paris
Palaiseau, France
jan.gugenheimer@tu-darmstadt.de
ABSTRACT
Human memory has notable limitations (e.g., forgetting) which
have necessitated a variety of memory aids (e.g., calendars). As
we grow closer to mass adoption of everyday Extended Reality
(XR), which is frequently leveraging perceptual limitations (e.g.,
redirected walking), it becomes pertinent to consider how XR could
leverage memory limitations (forgetting, distorting, persistence)
to induce memory manipulations. As memories highly impact our
self-perception, social interactions, and behaviors, there is a press-
ing need to understand XR Memory Manipulations (XRMMs). We
ran three speculative design workshops (n=12), with XR and mem-
ory researchers creating 48 XRMM scenarios. Through thematic
analysis, we define XRMMs, present a framework of their core
components and reveal three classes (at encoding, pre-retrieval, at
retrieval). Each class differs in terms of technology (AR, VR) and
impact on memory (influencing quality of memories, inducing for-
getting, distorting memories). We raise ethical concerns and discuss
opportunities of perceptual and memory manipulations in XR.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Human-centered computing → Virtual reality; Mixed / aug-
mented reality.
KEYWORDS
XR Memory Manipulations, Perceptual Manipulations, Speculative
Design, Extended Reality, Virtual Reality, Augmented Reality
ACM Reference Format:
Elise Bonnail, Wen-Jie Tseng, Mark McGill, Eric Lecolinet, Samuel Huron,
and Jan Gugenheimer. 2023. Memory Manipulations in Extended Reality.
In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI ’23), April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany. ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 20 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3544548.3580988
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany
© 2023 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9421-5/23/04...$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3544548.3580988
1
INTRODUCTION
Human memory is known to have a set of limitations. Long-term
memories can be forgotten (when they are inaccessible), distorted
(when they differ from the original perception), or persistent (when
they cannot be forgotten) [106]. As our memories influence our
thoughts and behaviors, memory limitations can have a significant
detriment to our lives and social relationships. Addressing these
limitations is what has given rise to the continual development
of new archival mediums (writing, pictures, video) and memory
aids (from post-it notes to AI assistants). Seeing the recent rise
of Extended Reality (XR) consumer technology (e.g., Meta, Apple,
Microsoft), we argue it has the potential to become a ubiquitous
technology, able to augment and impact the human intellect, and
in particular memory [39]. One example would be the ability to
revisit past memories in Virtual Reality (VR). Using immersive
3D reconstructions of past events creates a sense of presence and
embodiment, which enhances episodic memory performance [77,
118] and offers a more attractive way to reminisce [137].
However, while memory limitations can be compensated, they
can also be exploited to manipulate memory. Due to the suggestibil-
ity of memory, altering a picture can distort memories related to it
and lead to the creation of false memories [86, 98, 134]. XR being a
richer media than a regular 2D picture, it could facilitate the cre-
ation of false memories [109], and more generally facilitate memory
manipulations. In addition, XR has demonstrated its ability to take
advantage of human perceptual limitations to manipulate users,
which we refer to as perceptual manipulations. Much research is fo-
cused on Virtual-Physical Perceptual Manipulations (VPPMs) [126],
which exploit the limitations of human perception in order to ef-
fect changes in users’ physical movements (e.g., redirected walking
[123], haptic retargeting [5]). Similar to perception, memory has
limitations (forgetting, distorting, persistence [106]) that could be
exploited in XR to induce memory manipulations, which we refer
to as XR Memory Manipulations (XRMMs). Although VPPMs can
enhance users’ XR experience (e.g., by enabling a longer virtual
walking experience despite limited physical space [123]), these ma-
nipulations are generally imperceptible and the intent behind the
use of VPPMs is open to abuse [19, 126]. While these perceptual
manipulations have an immediate impact on users’ physical ac-
tions, memory manipulations could be more invasive and have
longer-term impact on users’ self-perception, social interactions,
arXiv:2304.02394v1  [cs.HC]  5 Apr 2023
CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany
Bonnail et al.
and behaviors (through the three autobiographical memory func-
tions [14]). Therefore, it is crucial that we understand the extent to
which our memory can be manipulated with XR, and how this tech-
nology can uniquely contribute to or amplify these manipulations.
In this paper, we strive to understand what types of memory
manipulations are possible in XR, and how the technology works as
an enabler or amplifier in these manipulations. To broadly explore
the scope of XRMMs, we ran three speculative design workshops,
each with two XR researchers and two cognitive psychology re-
searchers having strong knowledge about memory (n=12). We used
speculative design methods to envision future scenarios while still
grounding the workshop in our current understanding of memory
processes and XR capabilities. During these workshops, experts
were asked to individually generate scenarios of XRMMs, resulting
in 48 XRMM scenarios. The scenarios focused on specific questions:
who would use the application, how the manipulation would work
and why would it be used, grounded on which cognitive process
and XR specific features. Consecutively, experts selected their most
promising scenarios that were additionally discussed in more depth
to assess, from both technical and cognitive point of views, if they
are likely to be implemented in the future, and to discuss their
outcomes (22 discussed XRMM scenarios). Three authors coded the
data and used thematic analysis in seven sessions (each four hours)
to uncover underlying themes and mechanisms used.
From this analysis, we define XR Memory Manipulations (XR-
MMs) as perceptual manipulations grounded in memory limitations
with the intention to impact memories, leading to long-term effects on
users, through the self, social and directive functions of autobiographic
memory. From the data, we discovered five core components that
characterize memory manipulations (context, memory mechanism,
implementation, memory functions, and final goal). We present these
as the framework of XRMMs. Additionally, we found three classes of
XRMMs that differ in terms of technology and outcomes: 1) manip-
ulations occurring at encoding (i.e., simultaneously as the original
perception of the event), which aim at influencing the quality of
memory encoding and predominantly rely on Augmented Reality
(AR) technologies (e.g., steering user attention with AR to make
the encoding of memories stronger); 2) manipulations occurring
at retrieval (i.e., when past events are digitally revisited), which
aim at distorting the perception of a past event and predominantly
rely on immersive reconstruction of scenes in Virtual Reality (VR)
(e.g., altering a recording of prior event to overwrite the original
memory); 3) manipulations occurring pre-retrieval (i.e., just before
the memory is remembered), which aim at inducing forgetting (e.g.,
hiding elements in AR to help someone to forget something). Most
of the scenarios take advantage of features unique to XR, which en-
able new types of memory manipulations. Although some XRMM
scenarios do not fully depend on XR to be delivered and are adapted
from already existing techniques using more traditional media (e.g.,
pictures), we present a discussion about how XR-specific features
(e.g., the capacity to fully immerse users in a virtual environment)
could amplify the effect of memory manipulations. While several
scenarios have a positive intent (13 positive, 9 negative discussed
scenarios), some of them could, intentionally or not, represent
harms that need to be addressed. During the discussion, most ex-
perts raised ethical concerns and were worried about future abuse.
We present a final discussion around the potential benefits XR-
MMs could generate, their potential dangers, and what role our
community of HCI researchers is playing in the pursuit of research-
ing and improving perceptual manipulations in XR. We argue that
XRMMs are a new type of perceptual manipulation in XR, whose
focus is not on impacting immediate actions but on impacting users’
on the long-term, through the self, social and directive functions of
autobiographical memory.
This work has two main contributions: 1) The definition of XR-
MMs and a framework presenting the core components that char-
acterize these manipulations; 2) The classification of three classes
of memory manipulation in XR and insights about their unique
technical characteristics and outcomes (manipulations at encoding
influencing the quality of memories with AR, manipulations at
retrieval distorting memories with VR, manipulations pre-retrieval
inducing forgetting), grounded in ongoing cognitive psychology
and XR research.
2
BACKGROUND
In this section we present a necessary background about human
memory (processes, impacts and limitations) grounded in cognitive
psychology research, and our premise of ubiquitous XR technology.
The knowledge we present in this section was also explained as an
introduction to our workshop, to bridge the gap between experts
from both fields.
2.1
Human Memory
Memory refers to the cognitive process of remembering information.
It is a broad term, as there are many different types of memory,
each with specific capacities and functions. The model proposed
by Shiffrin and Atkinson differentiates sensory and short-term
memory from long-term memory [112]. In this paper, we focus
on long-term memory, which stores information that have been
processed thoroughly, as it is the type of memory for which we use
technology support more frequently (section 3.1). The formation
of long-term memories occurs in three stages [82, 112]: encoding
(acquiring of new information captured by the senses), storage
(maintaining and retaining information over time), and retrieval
(recalling or recognizing previously stored information).
2.1.1
Autobiographical Memory Functions. In this work, we partic-
ularly focus on Autobiographical Memories (AM), which includes
recollected memories of personal experiences and general knowl-
edge of the self [40], as it defines and impacts many aspects of an
individual’s life. Bluck and Alea [14] name three AM functions: 1)
the self function, which maintains self coherence over time (e.g.,
personality, personal beliefs); 2) the social function, which helps
developing and maintaining connections with others (e.g., remem-
bering conversations with friends or being able to tell an anecdote);
3) the directive function, which guides present and future thoughts
and behaviors (e.g., deciding to buy something based on previous
experience). Unlike other types of perceptual manipulations (e.g.,
VPPMs [126]) which have a brief and immediate impact on users,
memory manipulations could have a longitudinal and long-term
impact on users, through the three AM functions (e.g., impacting
their self-perception, social interactions and behaviors).
Memory Manipulations in Extended Reality
CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany
Memory limitation
Description
Example
Transience
Decreasing accessibility of
memory over time
Forgetting what exactly
happened 10 years ago
Forgetting:
When we fail to bring to
mind an information
Absent-mindedness
Inattentive processing contributes
to weak memories
Forgetting location of
keys or glasses
Blocking
Temporary inaccessibility
of memory
Temporarily forgetting a
word
Misattribution
Attributing a memory to
the wrong source
Confusion between imagined
and real events
Distorting:
When a memory differs from
the original perception
Suggestibility
New information can be implanted
to a memory
Inducing false memories
through leading questions
Bias
Influence of current knowledge and
beliefs on memories
Current mood influences
perception of the past
Persistence:
When a memory cannot be
forgotten
Inability to forget unwanted
memories
Flashbacks of traumatic
memories
Table 1: Seven sins of memory presented by Daniel Schacter [106]. We refer to them as memory limitations
2.1.2
Memory Limitations. Memory plays a ubiquitous role in our
lives, but many errors can occur at each stage of the memory process.
Schacter et al. classified memory limitations into seven basic “sins”,
that can be separated into three types: forgetting, distorting, and
persistence (Table 1). We give more explanations about these mem-
ory limitations when discussing the grounding of XRMM classes
(sections 6, 7, 8).
We argue that these memory limitations are the equivalent of
perceptual thresholds leveraged in VPPMs. They are limitations in
the cognitive system which applications could leverage or overcome
to achieve a desired outcome around the user.
2.2
Extended Reality (XR)
Our research works under the premise that future XR technologies
will become ubiquitous (similar to smartphones nowadays), and
that users will engage with it on a daily basis, in every life context
(mobile, stationary [48, 49]). We envision a technology that is not
focusing on either AR or VR but presents one device (whatever
the shape might be) that is capable to function across the whole
spectrum of the Milgram Continuum [84]. This would provide the
user the ability to augment the real world (AR), but also the ability
to be immersed in a fully virtual scene when necessary (VR). We
refer to this concept as ubiquitous XR.
3
RELATED WORK
3.1
Memory Aids
HCI research about memory has mainly been focused on memory
aids, aiming to compensate memory failures, to improve perfor-
mance on everyday tasks requiring memory [58]. Charness et al.
distinguish two types of memory supportive technology: internal
memory aids, that support the memory processes, and external
memory aids, that substitute and offload memory processes [21].
However, offloading memory can also impair memory and expose
users to manipulations [38, 98].
3.1.1
Internal Memory Aids. Internal memory aids are techniques
that support the cognitive process of memorizing, to make it more
efficient [21]. One example is the method of Loci, which helps to
memorize information by mentally associating them to familiar
places [120]. HCI research has explored how this memorization
technique can be done using visual displays [30, 35, 71], and how
mnemonics can help users remembering information such as pass-
words [1, 15, 20, 35, 62]. The method of Loci has been adapted to
XR using virtual memory palaces [72, 101, 131, 138], as immersion
can aid recall [68]. In this paper, we explore in a broader way how
XR specific functionalities could be leveraged to influence cognitive
processes (e.g., to support or impair memorization).
3.1.2
External Memory Aids. External memory aids aim to sub-
stitute memory and offload the cognitive process of memorizing
(using external storage to offload the quantity of memories stored in
mind) [21]. These tools can substitute prospective memory (mem-
ory of actions to do), to ensure that we remember things we intend
to do in the future (e.g., using calendar to remember to attend an ap-
pointment). New technologies (e.g., smartphones) provide effective
reminder tools (e.g., Google calendar [80]) [18, 58, 59, 113]. External
memory aids can also substitute retrospective memory (memory
of past events), to increase the amount of past events that can be
recalled (e.g., by storing pictures in a computer) [18, 58]. With the
ubiquity of smartphones and data storage becoming cheaper, people
can record anything at any time, a practice called lifelogging [51, 52].
These technologies support reminiscence and reflection [26, 57],
which improves well-being [16, 57]. The rich contextual information
of images facilitates autobiographical recollection [9, 110]. Instead
of viewing recordings on a flat screen, these could be stored as 3D
scenes that one could revisit with a VR HMD. This idea is started
CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany
Bonnail et al.
to be explored by companies and artists [87, 92]. VR can be used
for reminiscence therapy (the discussion of past experiences with
other people to improve well-being [136]), by immersing patients in
familiar environments in VR [114, 125, 137], and is a more attractive
way to reminisce than pictures [137].
All these prior works demonstrate that technology has the ability
to impact users’ memory and that HCI is currently heavily engaged
in providing tools to enable such. However, our work aims to under-
stand how future memory tools would look like in XR, and provide
a critical reflection on potential abuse and opportunities.
3.2
Risks of Offloading Memory
Although these memory aids have many benefits, researchers started
to question whether such technologies could impair memory [25,
38, 98, 107] and pose safety and privacy issues [10, 31]. First, record-
ing tools can divide attention, and affect how events are encoded
[38, 53]. Additionally, being able to remember everything through a
total externalization of memories can have negative effects (e.g, the
inability to move on after a breakup), which should be considered
in the design of such technologies [105]. Clinch et al. identify two
potential risks associated with memory externalization: inhibition
(retaining less information by ourselves) and distortion (errors in
what and how we remember) [25]. Researchers showed that offload-
ing memories to external media exposes them to manipulations (e.g.,
altering pictures), which can lead to the creation of false memories
(i.e., a strong confidence in the memory of an event that did not
actually occur) [25, 86, 98, 134]. These questions of memory manip-
ulations are still new and mainly focused on more traditional media
like pictures. Our work explores how new immersive technologies
like XR could be used to manipulate users’ memory.
3.3
Perceptual Illusions and Manipulations
XR devices create visual, auditory, and haptic stimuli, which facil-
itates control over what users perceive. XR is based on illusions
[47] and the creation of immersive virtual environments, in which
users have a sense of presence [36, 117]. Having a plausible virtual
environment was also shown to make users behave realistically
(e.g., plausibility illusion [103, 115]), and feel like their virtual avatar
has become a part of their body (e.g., embodiment illusion [119]).
These illusions enable the implementation of a variety of per-
ceptual manipulations, such as VPPMs [126], which leverage visual
dominance [95] and unawareness of sensory discrepancy [130] to
influence physical actions. Redirected walking [97, 122, 123] and
haptic retargeting [5, 23] techniques can steer users’ physical walk-
ing paths and hand movements by imperceptibly manipulating the
virtual scene. Mhaidli et Schaub also identified manipulation tech-
niques unique to XR that could be used for advertising purposes
[83] (e.g., altering what consumers see to bias their consumption
behavior). Although these manipulation techniques could be bene-
ficial for users (e.g., VPPMs enhancing VR experience), researchers
started to explore how they could be exploited maliciously to harm
users [19, 83, 126], and how users would react to such attacks [22].
While most of these perceptual manipulations target to have an
immediate impact on the user, XRMMs have the potential to have
longer-term impacts, through the AM functions (section 2.1.1).
3.4
XR Memory Manipulations
These XR perceptual manipulations are possible because users’
behaviors in the virtual environment are similar to real behaviors.
Studies showed that the encoding and retrieval processes of virtual
events are similar to those of real events, making VR an ideal tool
for studying real-life cognition under controlled conditions [63, 73,
94]. Particularly, immersion, embodiment, and sense of presence
enhance memory encoding and retrieval [12, 34, 77, 90, 118].
While false memories have traditionally been studied using nar-
ratives and pictures, Segovia et al. showed that immersing preschool
children in a virtual experience can generate false memories [109].
As pointed out by Aliman et al., combining the capacity of AI to gen-
erate deepfakes with the capacity of VR to create durable memories
could be used for malicious creation of false memories [4].
HCI research focused on how to compensate and overcome mem-
ory limitations, and what risks could represent such techniques.
However, little work has explored how technologies could lever-
age memory limitations to achieve other purposes. An example of
such work is Mise Unseen, which takes advantage of visual memory
failures and the change blindness effect to implement a redirection
technique in VR [79]. Friedman et al. introduced a method to give
people the illusion of time travel in VR, which can have an impact
on implicit morality and evaluation of past events [45], and Cuperus
et al. showed that manipulating replays of events in virtual reality
can alter the memory for sport performances and impact the feeling
of competence [29]. While all these prior works demonstrated that
XR has the ability to manipulate memory and is potentially more
powerful than traditional media, they were individual examples
of such XRMMs. In this work, our goal is to have a holistic and
deeper understanding of all the types of XRMMs that are possible
and discuss their potential impact on the user.
4
METHOD
To broadly explore potential XRMMs, we ran three speculative
design workshops, bringing together XR and memory researchers.
As XR has not yet become a prevalent technology like smartphones,
speculative design methods allowed us to explore XRMMs and
reflect on their ethical implications, without being restrained to the
current usage and capabilities of XR. In this workshop, experts were
asked to individually generate XRMM scenarios. These scenarios
are grounded in experts’ knowledge about XR and human memory,
and in the background that was given (section 2). In the discussion
phase, we asked experts to select the most promising scenarios
and to discuss the likelihood of such scenarios and their potential
outcomes (25 scenarios discussed, presented in Table 3). Finally,
we applied thematic analysis to uncover underlying themes and
mechanisms used.
4.1
Participants
Twelve experts (age: 𝑀 = 28.7,𝑆𝐷 = 4 yrs) participated in our
workshops (Table 2). As the goal was to explore scenarios of XR-
MMs, we recruited two types of experts: HCI researchers special-
ized in XR (n=6, called XR experts), and cognitive psychology re-
searchers studying human memory (n=6, called memory experts).
We ran the workshop three times, inviting each time two memory
experts and two XR experts. This configuration enables to have
Memory Manipulations in Extended Reality
CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany
ID
Age
Gender
Profession
Years in Profession
Session 1
PXR1
25
Female
HCI researcher
1
PXR2
28
Male
HCI researcher
5
PM1
24
Female
Cognitive engineer
3
PM2
24
Female
Cognitive psychology student
4
Session 2
PXR3
33
Male
HCI designer
10
PXR4
33
Male
HCI researcher
4
PM3
26
Female
Cognitive psychology researcher
3
PM4
30
Male
Cognitive psychology researcher
8
Session 3
PXR5
27
Male
HCI researcher
6
PXR6
27
Male
HCI researcher
5
PM5
38
Male
Cognitive psychology researcher
2
PM6
30
Male
Cognitive psychology researcher
2
Table 2: Demographic of experts in XR and cognitive psy-
chology
both a discussion between two experts of the same field, and be-
tween experts of different fields. We specifically recruited cognitive
psychology researchers who have already used XR, to make sure
that they have some basic understanding of what is XR, how it can
be used and what new possibilities these technologies offer. Most of
the memory experts rated their XR knowledge to be at least average
and mostly above average (5-point Likert scale, M = 3.8, SD = 0.4).
Each group of experts rated their knowledge to be at least above
average and mostly very high in their expertise field (M = 4.6, SD
= 0.5). The experts were remunerated 30 euros for taking part in
the workshop. Sessions were conducted over zoom using Miro as
a brainstorming tool. During the last session, PM6 disconnected
half-way in the workshop and could not reconnect. The data that
was created until the disconnection was included in the analysis.
4.2
Workshop Procedure
Figure 1: Description of the workshop procedure including
steps, goal and duration. The blue square show the three
rounds. The red A,B,C point the time for each round.
Each workshop session lasted three hours and was composed
of four experts and one moderator. It consisted of an introduction,
and three rounds of introduction to memory limitations, individual
brainstorming, and discussion (Figure 1).
4.2.1
Introduction. To create a common understanding of the dif-
ferent fields, we gave a detailed introduction on human memory
(types, process, functions, and limitations, section 2.1) and XR tech-
nologies (section 2.2). We warned participants that this background
was not exhaustive, and they were invited to refer to their own
knowledge and expertise.
Each round of brainstorming and discussion was focused on one
set of memory limitations (forgetting, distorting and persistence,
Table 1). We chose to separate the workshop sessions into three
rounds so that every different type of memory limitation can be
equally explored. The order of rounds between workshops was
counterbalanced using a latin-square.
Figure 2: Scenario template - Miro board screenshot. This
template was used by participants during individual brain-
storming sessions to generate scenarios.
4.2.2
Individual Brainstorming. Experts were asked to generate as
many XRMM scenarios as possible by filling a template (Figure 2).
The goal of this template was to help the experts to give more details
about the scenarios: who would use the XR application and why?
What is the aim of the manipulation and how is it implemented?
The experts were free to go beyond that template.
4.2.3
Discussion. During the discussion phases, each expert had
two minutes to present a scenario in more depth. They were in-
structed to select scenarios for discussion that they deemed to be
the most interesting and valuable. The other experts and moder-
ator could ask questions about the scenario and add comments.
Then, each expert rated three aspects of the scenarios (possibility
to implement such XRMMs from a (1) technical and (2) cognitive
perspective and (3) classify harm or benefit), to trigger discussions.
This phase was recorded to be transcribed.
4.3
Data Collection
Overall, participants generated 74 scenarios. 25 of them were pre-
sented and discussed by the participants during the workshop.
We provide a short description of these scenarios in Table 3. The
CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany
Bonnail et al.
coding was conducted on the transcripts of these 25 discussions.
The remaining 49 scenarios existed as templates filled in the Miro
board but could not be explained and discussed in detail during the
workshop due to time limitations. As these scenarios were often
incomplete and lacked details to be fairly represented, we did not
use them for the coding sessions, and we do not provide them in
this paper. However, some of these non-discussed scenarios con-
tained enough information to derive high-level constructs from
them. These scenarios were used in a final session to count the
number of scenarios matching the XRMMs definition (section 4.5)
and to validate the classes found with the coding.
4.4
Thematic Analysis
To analyze the data, three authors conducted synchronous collab-
orative coding sessions (7 sessions each taking 4 hours, 28 hours
in total). In a first meeting, the three coders started by creating an
initial codebook (deductive coding) around questions of interest
(who is involved in the manipulation, how does it work and why
is it used). Afterward, each coder read through all the transcripts
of the 25 discussed scenarios without coding them. Then, during 4
meetings, the three coders discussed each scenario. The scenarios
were coded following 1) the initial codebook and 2) an open coding
procedure (inductive coding). Once a new code that was not covered
by the existing codebook came up, the coders discussed this new
code, which was added only if all the coders reached an absolute
consensus. In the last two sessions, the created codes were struc-
tured into themes and connected to larger structures and concepts,
resulting in our framework and classes of XRMMs. Conflicts were
resolved during the meetings by discussing individual perspectives
on every codes and themes until reaching a consensus.
4.5
Scenarios Exclusion
After the final coding, we derived a definition of XRMMs (sec-
tion 5.1) which we used to filter scenarios that did not match the
definition. This resulted in 3 of the discussed scenarios to be re-
moved (S23, S24, S25, Table 3), because they do not intend to impact
memory, and they are not based on memory limitations. In the sce-
nario S23, advertisements are added in users’ field of view to give
visibility to brands, but there is no clear intention to distort mem-
ories or to influence the cognitive process of memorization. The
scenarios S24 and S25 both leverage individual user preferences (i.e.,
smells and cultural items) to make them appreciate a product, with-
out having an impact on memory. 15 of the non-discussed scenarios
did not match the XRMM definition for the same reasons, and 8 did
not have enough description to be understood. We obtain a total of
48 scenarios of XRMMs (22 discussed and 26 non-discussed). In the
following, the scenarios we refer to are the 22 discussed scenarios
of XRMMs (S1 to S22, presented in Table 3).
5
RESULTS
Based on our initial questions of interest (who is involved in the
manipulation, how does it work and why is it used) and the resulting
themes and codes, we present a definition of XRMMs, a framework
of their core components and three classes of XRMMs.
5.1
Definition of XRMMs
To provide a definition of XRMMs we first needed to provide a
general definition of perceptual manipulations, and then show how
XRMMs are different from other types of perceptual manipulations,
such as VPPMs [126].
Definition of Perceptual Manipulations: Perceptual manip-
ulations are mechanisms grounded in limitations of users’ cognition
and perception with a clear intention to influence users towards a
specific outcome.
This general definition is classifying PMs as a mechanism (de-
fined by Webster dictionary as “a process, technique, or system for
achieving a result” 1) and describing the two core components of
perceptual manipulations: (a) a grounding in cognitive and percep-
tual limitations and thresholds and (b) a clear intention to steer
towards a specific outcome. The outcome could be effecting change
in beliefs, attitudes, intentions and resultant behaviour/responses -
or influencing any other cognitive and affective response. We kept
this definition open to be able to include all future types of percep-
tual manipulations. Grounded in our analysis of the different classes
of XRMMs and their core components, we created the following
definition of XRMMs.
Definition of XR Memory Manipulations: XRMMs are per-
ceptual manipulations grounded in memory limitations with the inten-
tion to impact memories, leading to long-term effects on users, through
the self, social and directive functions of autobiographic memory.
The intention of impacting users’ memory allows us to distin-
guish XRMMs at the stage of encoding from general perceptual
manipulations, and to distinguish XRMMs from VPPMs [126].
Definition of Virtual-Physical Perceptual Manipulations:
VPPMs are perceptual manipulations that are grounded in visual-
haptic limitations with the intention to nudge the user’s physical
movements
5.2
XRMMs Framework
We found that five core components were able to describe the inten-
tions and structures of XRMMs: the context, the memory mechanisms,
the implementation, the memory functions and the final goal (Fig-
ure 3). These components were part of all the generated scenarios.
5.2.1
Context. XRMMs are done in a certain context. There is a
manipulated, who is the target of the manipulation, a manipulator,
who is at the origin of the manipulation, and an XR application
within which the manipulation is occurring.
10 out of 22 scenarios are targeting a vulnerable population
(e.g., people suffering from trauma or memory problems). This
population can benefit from XRMMs (e.g., to treat a trauma), but
they can also be harmed.
1“Mechanism” by Webster dictionary: https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/
mechanism
Memory Manipulations in Extended Reality
CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany
Figure 3: Framework presenting the five core components of XRMMs
In 6 out of 22 scenarios, the manipulator and the manipulated
were the same person. In this case, the user is manipulating themself
through XR, knowing that the results of the manipulation would
benefit them. When the manipulator is not the manipulated, the
scenarios represent three types of manipulators: people in power,
businesses, and attackers. These actors are always using XRMMs
for their own interest.
Finally, as XRMMs are based on XR technologies, they are always
done within an XR application. In the scenarios that were generated,
the XRMMs are done within various types of applications (e.g.,
training applications, social media, entertainment, therapy tool,
etc). The purpose of the application is not necessarily the same as
the purpose of the manipulation. In this case, the user is often not
aware of the manipulation.
5.2.2
Memory Mechanism. XRMMs are relying on memory mech-
anisms. In this work we focus on long-term memories, and we
grounded the workshops in the seven memory limitations pre-
sented by Daniel Schacter (Table 1) [106]. These limitations can
either be leveraged (taking advantage of memory limitations to ma-
nipulate it), or prevented (using XR to overcome these limitations).
14 scenarios are leveraging memory limitations (for both positive
and negative purposes), and 8 scenarios are preventing them (for
positive purposes only). Each of the seven memory limitations were
explored by the scenarios. 3 scenarios focused on transience, 4 on
absent-mindedness, 1 on blocking, 7 on misattribution and sug-
gestibility, 3 on bias and 4 on persistence. We found that depending
on the moment when the manipulation takes place in relation to
the memory process (at encoding, pre-retrieval, at retrieval), and
depending on the type of memory limitation that is leveraged, dif-
ferent implementations and strategies are used. This constitutes
three classes of XRMMs which are described in sections 6, 7 and 8.
5.2.3
Implementation. We found a split between types of imple-
mentation (AR and VR techniques) that are used. In AR, XRMMs
can be implemented by adding digital elements to the real world
(e.g., adding a frame around an object), by removing elements from
the real world (e.g., hiding an object), or by modifying elements (e.g.,
replacing an real object by a different virtual one). In VR, manip-
ulations can be done by immersing users in a new environment, or
in a 3D reconstruction of a past event that they already experienced
before. This reconstruction can either be accurate or altered. In
sections 6, 7 and 8, we present what implementations are used
depending on the memory mechanisms involved.
5.2.4
Outcomes. This context and memory mechanisms, associ-
ated with an implementation, can influence the cognitive processes
associated with the encoding or retrieval of memory, or influence
the perception of past events. This manipulation can impact users
through the three functions of AM (section 2.1.1) [14]. The scenar-
ios explore how XRMMs can have an influence on self-perception,
preferences and emotional state (related to the self-function of AM),
on relationships and empathy (related to the social function), and
on decisions and behaviors (related to the directive function).
Impacting users through the memory functions (self, social and
directive) enables to achieve a final goal. For example, XRMMs
could be used to influence decisions (impact through the directive
function), with the final goal to make someone buy a product, or
it could be used to have an impact on self-confidence (e.g., impact
through the self-function), with the final goal to help someone
perform better in a task. From the scenarios, we identified four main
types of final goals: purely malicious goals (e.g., creating chaos),
making money (e.g., selling a service or a product), improving
mental state (e.g., coping with traumas), and self-optimization (e.g.,
performing better in a task).
5.3
Threat Model
Grounded in the “manipulator” theme of our framework, we derived
a threat model outlining future abusive scenarios. An attacker wants
to influence a user’s future decisions, social interactions, or self-
perception (section 2.1.1), by leveraging memory manipulations
CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany
Bonnail et al.
Figure 4: The three classes of XRMMs (at encoding, pre-retrieval, retrieval), which differ in terms of technology used, and impact
on memory. Two examples of mechanisms (How, Example scenarios) are given for each class.
in XR (XRMMs). To achieve this, the attacker needs access to the
software of the device, and to be able to control its function (e.g.,
access to the user’s data, the device’s sensor data, and control over
device output). We outline three routes towards enacting such a
threat that emerged from our dataset:
Non-consensual manipulation by tricking the VR user into
installing malware (e.g., similar to current approaches in smart-
phones, as done in the Pegasus spyware 2). This can be seen in
scenarios S3, S13, S17, S19, and S20, where a hacker gains control
over a user’s software.
Exploiting a position of power by having access to the de-
vice from a position of power and authority (e.g., by being a care-
taker of a person using VR as a therapy tool, as in scenarios S7, S8,
S10, and S11).
Consensual, incentivized manipulation by gaining the user’s
permission (e.g., making the user accept to be manipulated in ex-
change for free services). With the rise of computing technology
and social media, we accepted a new form of direct marketing and
advertising that is tailored directly toward the individual consumer
and leverages psychological principles such as those outlined in
dark design patterns. Similar business models could potentially
be done with XRMMs (as seen in scenarios S1, S12, S15, and S18).
This opens a potential threat around the user willingly accepting a
method that is actively influencing their memory as a “currency”
to get access to a service (similar to today’s approach of “paying”
for social media with our data).
5.4
Classes of XRMMs
After coding each scenario we noticed one set of codes focusing on
the moment when the manipulation occurs. Knowing the stages of
formation of long-term memories (encoding, storage and retrieval,
2Pegasus, smartphone spyware https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pegasus_(spyware)
section 2.1 [82, 112]), we were able to identify three moments when
a manipulation can occur: while the event is happening (at encod-
ing), while it is remembered (at retrieval), or between encoding
and retrieval (pre-retrieval) (Figure 4). All of the generated XRMMs
scenarios fall into one of these three categories. In 6 scenarios,
the manipulation occurs at encoding, 14 others occur at retrieval,
and 2 others occur pre-retrieval (Table 3). After analyzing these
scenarios, we found three main classes of XRMMs that differ in
terms of technology and impacts: 1) manipulations at encoding aim
at influencing the quality of memory encoding and rely mainly on
the capacity of AR to visually alter (add, remove, modify) reality; 2)
manipulations at retrieval aim at distorting the perception of past
events and rely mainly on immersive reconstruction of scenes in VR;
3) manipulations pre-retrieval aim at inducing forgetting, using both
AR or VR specific abilities (Figure 4).
In the following, we present each XRMM class by providing ex-
amples of scenarios generated during the workshop and grounding
them in cognitive psychology research. For each class, we present
two examples of ways to impact memory (“How” in Figure 4). These
are just examples of mechanisms that were explored during the
workshops, other mechanisms could be explored by future research.
To improve readability, we will not only present the classes as re-
sults but add an explanation and interpretation as would usually be
done in a separate discussion section. Our final discussion will focus
on the larger concept of XRMMs and perceptual manipulations.
6
XRMMS AT ENCODING
The first moment when a memory can be manipulated is at encoding,
simultaneously as the original perception of the event. The encod-
ing phase is important because it determines what will be stored in
long-term memory, and how it will be stored [82]. Therefore, acting
at encoding could enable to act on the quality of the memory. From
Memory Manipulations in Extended Reality
CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany
Figure 5: Illustration of “This You Should Remember” (S6). Louise uses AR to better encode important information. Figure A
illustrates the unaltered field of view, a scene crowded with visual stimuli. Figure B illustrates in green how the AR application
is occluding the elements that are considered by the system as distractions, and in pink how information that are considered
worth remembering are emphasized.
the 6 out of 22 discussed scenarios of XRMMs at encoding, we found
that these manipulations could be done by inducing emotions or by
steering attention (by preventing or leveraging absent-mindedness),
mainly using AR. We found that XRMMs at encoding could be used
to help encode better quality memories, but it could also be used
for the opposite purpose: to deliberately make someone’s memories
weaker. In the following, we explain and discuss these two means
to influence encoding: inducing emotions and steering attention.
6.1
Influencing Encoding by Inducing
Emotions
Two scenarios (S1, S2, presented in Table 3) explore how XRMMs
could influence encoding by inducing emotions.
6.1.1
Grounding. Emotions modulate every aspect of cognition,
and particularly memory [127]. It is established that the emotions
felt during an event influence the retention and recall of the mem-
ory: experiences linked to strong emotion are retained longer, more
vividly and accurately [17, 93, 127]. While some studies indicate that
positive emotions facilitate learning [128], negative emotions such
as stress or fear can also facilitate or alter the quality of memory
encoding, depending on the intensity of the emotion [81, 133].
6.1.2
Scenarios. In the scenario “You’ll Remember the Unlikely
Risky Event” (S2), XR is used to induce strong emotion in a learning
context, so the information is better encoded and remembered
later (e.g., stimulating an accident while learning how to drive in
VR). Another scenario, “Peak-End Rule” (S1), uses XR to induce
intense positive emotions, which will be better remembered than
the negative ones and improve user’s self-perception.
6.2
Influencing Encoding by Steering Attention
Four scenarios (S3, S4, S5, S6, presented in Table 3) explore how
XRMMs could influence encoding by steering attention with AR, pre-
venting or leveraging absent-mindedness.
6.2.1
Grounding. The encoding of memories is selective: we are
constantly exposed to large quantities of stimuli from our senses,
but since storing all this information is impossible, we make a first
selection at encoding [27, 32, 129]. Absent-mindedness (Table 1) is
when forgetting occurs because insufficient attention is given at
encoding (e.g., because of mind wandering or divided attention)
CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany
Bonnail et al.
[6, 13, 28, 106]. This can be observed in situations when people
forget where they left their glasses, because it is the kind of task
that is carried out automatically, without paying enough attention.
6.2.2
Scenarios. “This You Should Remember” (S6) depicts well
how absent-mindedness could be prevented or leveraged. In this sce-
nario, Louise has AR glasses and uses them to offload some cognitive
tasks. The AR application chooses for her what is worth remem-
bering, and steers her attention towards it, so it is better encoded.
Thanks to the AR glasses’ ability to visually alter reality (adding
content, removing or modifying), important elements in the envi-
ronment are framed or highlighted, and the non-important distrac-
tions are blurred (Figure 5). Detecting and deciding which are the
important elements is done through an AI process, based on crowd-
sourced data. The application is preventing absent-mindedness by
helping Louise to focus on important things to be remembered. It is
also leveraging absent-mindedness, to limit the encoding of events
deemed unworthy. Two other similar scenarios were generated (S4
and S5), where inattention is detected using biometric or neurolog-
ical signals, and attention is directed using visual feedback in AR
or by hiding distractions.
6.3
Discussion
6.3.1
Technological Challenges. In scenarios S1 and S2, influencing
the quality of memory encoding relies on the capacity of immersive
environments to induce emotions. Since VR can induce vivid emo-
tions and reactions similar to real events [41, 78, 115, 140], these
manipulations are technically plausible. The scenarios influencing
the quality of memory encoding through attention steering rely on
the capacity of AR to visually alter reality. As research focusing
on how to alter or diminish reality in real time shows promising
results [11, 24, 54, 85], such manipulations are plausible in a near fu-
ture from a technological perspective. Another technical challenge
for such manipulations is the ability of AI tools to identify in real
time what represents a distraction and what is important. However,
research in the direction of object detection and identification in
images made a lot of progress these last years [132, 139].
6.3.2
Role of XR. During the analysis, we additionally coded cur-
rently existing techniques that would have a similar impact on the
encoding of memory. We found that influencing memory encoding
by inducing emotions is not unique to XR, and scenarios similar
to S1 and S2 could be implemented using smartphone applications.
However, the capacity of XR to fully immerse the user in an envi-
ronment allows to induce vivid strong emotions [41, 78, 115, 140],
which could amplify this type of manipulation. We also found that
the current techniques to steer attention (e.g., noise-canceling head-
phones or focus mode on smartphones), cannot visually steer users’
attention. XR (and AR in particular here) is unique in its ability
to visually alter the perception of the real world. Using this could
enable to interfere with the encoding process more effectively than
most currently known techniques.
6.3.3
Purpose. The generated scenarios suggest that XRMMs at
encoding could help and benefit AR users. In four scenarios (S2, S4,
S5, S6), the goal of XRMMs is to optimize brain capacities and offload
cognitive tasks. PM3 mentioned that such techniques could be used
by healthy users but could also help people suffering from Attention
Deficit Disorders (ADD). However, another scenario (S3) relies on
the same idea of influencing encoding through attention, but with
the opposite purpose. In this scenario, distractions are added to
the field of view of the person wearing AR glasses to make their
memory encoding weaker, and make them vulnerable to attacks.
While the intentions behind the previous scenarios were positive,
this scenario depicts a malicious use of XRMMs at encoding.
7
XRMMS AT RETRIEVAL
A memory can be manipulated at retrieval, while it is being remem-
bered. Memory storage is dynamic: memories are susceptible to
change when they are retrieved, and retrieval leads to the formation
of new memories [2, 3, 104]. Therefore, acting while a memory is
remembered could enable to act on its perception, and distort it.
From the 14 discussed scenarios of XRMMs at retrieval, we found
that these manipulations could be done using VR reconstructions of
past events as a reflection tool (to leverage positivity bias and prevent
persistence), or using distorted reconstructions (leveraging misattri-
bution and suggestibility). We found that XRMMs at retrieval could
be used to influence someone’s perception of the past for various
positive purposes (e.g., to prevent suffering), but it could also be
used to make someone vulnerable. In the following, we explain and
discuss these two means to influence perception of the past and
distort memories: supporting reflection and inducing suggestions.
7.1
Influencing Perception through Reflection
Five scenarios (S7, S8, S9, S10, S11, S12, S13, presented in Table 3) ex-
plore how XRMMs could influence perception of past events by using
VR as a reflection tool, preventing or leveraging bias and persistence.
7.1.1
Grounding. Reflection is the process of reviewing past expe-
riences to learn from it and to reframe it. Memories can be actively
reviewed through this process [66]. While reflecting on positive
events increases the ability to enjoy life and helps to perceive things
more positively [16], reflecting on negative events (e.g., being con-
fronted to traumatic events) can help to cope with them on the
long-term [91]. Reflection can be done without employing technol-
ogy by mentally reviewing memories of past personal experiences,
or using technologies support, by reviewing rich digital records of
past events (e.g., text, images or videos) [57, 65].
7.1.2
Scenarios. “Therapy” (S8) depicts how VR could be used to
reflect on past experiences and reframe them. In this scenario, a
patient is immersed in a VR reconstruction of a past event that
they are discussing with the therapist. This reconstruction helps
the patient to retrieve the memories of that event, and analyse
the situation with the information that they have now but they
did not have when the event occured. “Couple Game” (S9) and
“Dysmorphia” (S10) also explore that direction, respectively to help
couples communicating, and to correct self-perception. “Traumatic
Memory” (S7) shows how a therapist could use VR as a tool to treat
a patient suffering from Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD), by
immersing to them in the context of the trauma. This method, called
Virtual Reality Exposure Therapy (VRET), is already explored and
shows promising results [33, 46, 111].
However, even if being exposed to traumatic memories can be
benefiting on long-term, it can also be harmful on short term. Two
Memory Manipulations in Extended Reality
CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany
Figure 6: Illustration of the scenario “Buy a Friend” (S18). Jim inserts himself in the VR album of Jenny’s party, to distort her
memory and make her remember he was there. In blue the participants that were present at Jenny’s party, in orange the hand
of Jim editing the VR reconstruction of the party, in pink the insertion of the 3D capture of Jim inside the party, in green the
altered parts of the reconstruction.
scenarios (S12, S13), explore how malicious actors could expose
VR users to traumatic events to make them suffer out of malicious
intend or make them uncomfortable with the intention to sell an
option which could prevent future exposure.
7.2
Distorting Memories through Suggestions
Seven scenarios (S14, S15, S16, S17, S18, S19, S20, presented in
Table 3) explore how XRMMs could distort memories by using al-
tered 3D reconstructions of past events, leveraging misattribution and
suggestibility.
7.2.1
Grounding. Misattribution is when a memory is present in
mind but attributed to the wrong source (Table 1) [106, 108]. This
effect occurs because a memory is not labeled with its source: it is
unconsciously deduced during retrieval, from different cues. If these
cues are not precise enough, the right source cannot be retrieved
[60, 61]. A good example of misattribution is when someone think
they remember an event they experienced, when they actually
just remember the picture of that event. Suggestibility refers to
the fact that memories can be distorted if a new information is
added between encoding and retrieval, through leading questions
or comments [75, 76, 106]. It is related to misattribution because
distortion from suggestion always involves some misattribution
between the real event and the suggested information.
7.2.2
Scenarios. “Buy a Friend” (S18) depicts well how misattribu-
tion and suggestibility could be leveraged. In this scenario, Jim uses
a VR social media application where immersive reconstructions
of past events can be revisited and shared with other users. With
his premium account, Jim has the possibility to insert himself in
other peoples’ memories. As he wants to get closer to Jenny but
could not go to her last party, he decides, through the application,
to insert a realistic 3D representation of himself in the memories
that Jenny shared (Figure 6). Later, when Jenny revisits her memory
in the application, she sees that Jim was there. Because of misattri-
bution (between the reconstructed event and the real event) and
CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany
Bonnail et al.
suggestibility (integrating the suggested information that Jim was
there), Jenny’s original memory might be distorted: “Jim was there
too, we had such a nice time together.”. In this scenario, the social
media business sells a service that uses XRMMs at retrieval. Six
other scenarios (S14, S15, S16, S17, S19, S20) also rely on the similar
idea that altered 3D reconstructions of past events could be used to
overwrite and distort the memory of the original event.
7.3
Discussion
7.3.1
Technological Challenges. The main technological challenge
of the scenarios of XRMMs at retrieval is the ability to make 3D
captures of events. As volumetric capture techniques are already
being developed and show good results [42, 74], this is plausible
from a technological perspective. The manipulations aiming at
distorting memories imply the ability to alter the 3D reconstructions
of past events (e.g., inserting someone in a VR memory, S18). This
could be done manually with some time and efforts, but represents a
technological challenge to be automated. However, recent advances
with inpainting methods [88, 96] and generative AI tools, such as
Stable Diffusion [121] or DALL.E 2 [89], suggest that this would be
plausible in a near future.
7.3.2
Role of XR. Influencing the perception of the past through
reflection is not unique to XR, as it can be done without technolog-
ical support, or by using pictures and videos [57, 65]. However, VR
represents a more attractive way to reminisce [137] and enhances
episodic memory performance [77, 118], which could facilitate this
type of manipulation. Distorting memories through suggestions
could already be done using pictures (e.g., the scenario “Buy a
Friend” (S18) could be done by inserting people in pictures shared
on social media) [86, 98, 134], but the realism and embodiment
enabled by XR could amplify the misattribution effect. In the Re-
ality Monitoring framework, Johnson and Raye identify the cues
used at retrieval to differentiate between external (real) and internal
(imagined) events [60, 61]. Memories that have a lot of sensory char-
acteristics (e.g., tactile, olfactory), semantic content (e.g., detailed
colors, shapes) and contextual information (e.g., spatial, temporal)
are more likely to be memories of external events. However, an
internal event that has plenty of characteristics corresponding to
an external event (e.g., rich in perceptual details) is likely to be
confused with an external event. The Reality Monitoring frame-
work can be combined with media richness theory to explain why
one could assume that increasing the “richness” (e.g., modalities,
visual quality) of VR experiences might also lead to being more
vulnerable to misattributions between real and virtual experiences
[43, 55, 56, 102, 109]. Segovia et al., were able to demonstrate that
using VR to induce false memories in elementary school children is
more effective compared to the baseline condition [109]. Although
distorting memories can be done with more traditional media like
pictures, using VR to induce suggestions could be more efficient
and amplify the effect of the manipulation.
7.3.3
Purpose. This class of manipulation can serve various pur-
poses. Immersive reconstructions of past events could be used as a
reflection tool to understand the past better and reframe it more
positively to prevent suffering (e.g., S8). PM1 suggests that such
manipulations should only be done by a professional third party
(e.g., a therapist), as immersing users in reconstruction of traumatic
memories could also be harmful (e.g., S13, S12).
Even though in two scenarios (S14, S16) altering reconstructions
of past events benefits the user (e.g., in S14, a VR user distorts their
own memories to have a better impression about their past and
increase their confidence), in three other scenarios (S15, S17, S20),
the XRMMs serve malicious purposes (e.g., selling something from
deception or making someone feel incompetent). In the scenario
“Buy a Friend” (S18), the initial intention is positive, as the goal of
the manipulation is to help someone make friends. However, this
friendship would be based on false memory induction, which is not
“ethically great”, accoding to PM3. Furthermore, this manipulation
could be used to get close to someone with malicious intentions (e.g.,
to get money from them). These scenarios raise ethical concerns
about the possibility to alter the 3D reconstruction of past events.
8
XRMMS PRE-RETRIEVAL
Finally, a memory can be manipulated pre-retrieval: after the event
occurred, but before it is remembered. From the two discussed sce-
narios of XRMMs pre-retrieval, we found that these manipulations
could induce forgetting, either by hiding memory cues (leveraging
transience), or by inducing stress (leveraging blocking). Inducing
forgetting could be done for positive or negative purposes (e.g., to
help someone forget a negative experience, or to make them feel
incompetent). As XRMMs pre-retrieval are described in only two of
the discussed scenarios, this direction should be explored in more
depth. In the following, we explain and discuss these two means to
induce forgetting: hiding memory cues and inducing stress.
8.1
Inducing Forgetting by Hiding Memory
cues
One scenario (S21, presented in Table 3) explores how XRMMs could
induce forgetting by hiding memory cues, leveraging transience.
8.1.1
Grounding. Transience refers to a weakening or loss of a
memory over time (Table 1) [106]. Memories from a few minutes
ago are naturally more precise and vivid than memories from years
ago [37]. Transience can be reduced by retrieving memories often
(e.g., thinking or talking about it). Memories that are rarely or never
recalled will be forgotten more quickly [7, 106, 124].
8.1.2
Scenario. The scenario “AR Eraser” (S21) explores how AR
could be used to leverage transience and help someone to forget
an unwanted memory. In this scenario, Alex uses AR glasses to
hide in their environment all the elements associated with their
former partner, which they want to forget faster. These elements
could either be blurred (e.g., blurring the bench where the couple
had their first kiss), or replaced (e.g., replacing a picture by another
one) (Figure 7). By hiding memory cues linked to that person, the
thoughts linked to them could be less frequent and the memories
could degrade faster.
8.2
Inducing Forgetting by Inducing Stress
One scenario (S22, presented in Table 3) explores how XRMMs could
induce forgetting by inducing stress, leveraging blocking.
Memory Manipulations in Extended Reality
CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany
Figure 7: Two illustrations of the scenario “AR Eraser” (S21). Alex uses AR to hide the elements associated with their former
partner, to forget them faster. Figures A1 and B1 show the unaltered situation. In A1 a photo of Alex and his former partner,
and in B1, the bench where they kissed for the first time. A2 and B2 shows what Alex sees with the AR glasses, replacing the
elements that might reinforce the unwanted memory. In pink are the replaced elements, in green are the visual area impacted
by the alteration.
8.2.1
Grounding. Blocking is when a memory is encoded and
stored in mind but cannot be retrieved when needed (Table 1) [106].
An example of blocking is the “tip of the tongue” state, when we
cannot remember a word, but we can produce partial information
about it, like its first letter. These retrieval failures can occur due to
stress [64, 135].
8.2.2
Scenario. The scenario “False Training App” (S22) explores
how blocking could be leveraged to make VR users vulnerable. In
this scenario, Paul uses a VR application that proposes to test his
knowledge (e.g. a quiz application). This application immerses users
in a stressful environment (e.g., showing a crowd around the user)
to intentionally trigger blocking and make them fail the test and
feel incompetent. The application then proposes the user to buy a
training application, to gain more competence.
8.3
Discussion
8.3.1
Technological Challenges. The “AR Eraser” (S21) scenario re-
lies on the ability of AR to diminish reality and hide elements, which
is already explored and partially plausible from a technological per-
spective [24, 54, 85]. This manipulation also requires AI-backed
tools to identify and select the elements which need to be altered
(in this scenario, the elements related to a former partner), and to
alter them seamlessly. This represents technological challenges, but
research about object detection in images [139], inpainting [96],
and generative AI [89, 121] shows promising results.
8.3.2
Role of XR. Although the technique used in the scenario
“AR Eraser” (S21) to induce forgetting is already physically feasible
without AR for personal objects (e.g., storing every object related
to a person in a box out of the user’s view, or removing someone
from a picture), AR is unique in its ability to hide elements that the
user cannot physically remove (e.g., a bench on the street), which
makes this manipulation more complete and effective.
The “False Training App” (S22) scenario relies on the capacity
to induce stress. It could already be implemented on smartphone
applications (e.g., by adding stress factors usually used in games),
but VR allows to fully immerse the user in a stressful environment,
which can trigger realistic physiological reactions [67, 78, 140]. This
specificity of VR could amplify the blocking effect and make this
manipulation easier to induce.
8.3.3
Purpose. The intention behind the scenario “AR Eraser” (S21)
is positive, as the goal is to prevent suffering caused by painful
memories. However, this technique is questionable, as interfering
with natural coping processes could have undesirable effects. PXR2
points out that bad memories “also exist for a reason”, so avoiding
them is not necessarily the right solution.
In the scenario “False Training App” (S22), forgetting is induced
for malicious purposes (i.e, selling something from deception). This
raises ethical concerns about the ability of immersive technologies
to induce realistic physiological reactions such as stress.
CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany
Bonnail et al.
9
GENERAL DISCUSSION
Our main goal with this research was to explore what types of
memory manipulations that could become possible in XR (classes),
and how the technology is functioning as an enabler or amplifier
in these manipulations (framework of core components).
From the thematic analysis of the generated scenarios, we found
that XRMMs can be described by five main components: the
context, the memory mechanisms, the implementation, the memory
functions and the final goal. While the context, implementation
and final goal are elements found in most other XR applications,
the grounding in memory mechanisms and the impact on users
through memory functions is a unique property of XRMMs. Similar
to perceptual manipulations, the designer of the application needs
to understand the limits of human cognition to implement the
manipulation and reach the desired goal. However, with memory
manipulations, the designer must not only know how to leverage
memory limitations, but must also know how they can impact users
through the AM functions (self, social and directive functions) to
achieve the desired outcome. This indicates that these XRMMs will
require a deeper understanding of human cognition and perception
during the design and development process.
Additionally, we found three classes of XRMMs that are sub-
stantially different from each other in terms of technology used (AR
vs. VR) and impact on memory (influencing quality of memories,
distorting memories, and inducing forgetting). XRMMs at encod-
ing rely dominantly on AR technology to interfere with memory
building. This class of XRMMs is strongly grounded in the abilities
of XR to sense the user and the environment and display digital
information over the physical world. XRMMs at retrieval rely dom-
inantly on VR technology and the ability to immerse users in 3D
reconstructions of past events, to either change their perception of
a memory or to distort it. While these manipulations could already
be implemented with 2D media such as images, VR is a richer me-
dia (relating to media-richness theory [56, 109]), and the encoding
processes of VR events are closer to those of real events [63, 118],
which could amplify the effect of these manipulations. XRMMs
pre-retrieval focus on inducing forgetting by hiding memory cues
(in AR) or by inducing stress (in VR). This class falls into the same
arguments about being potentially more severe than 2D equivalents
and enabling new opportunities for impacting users’ memory.
Working with experts from both fields (XR and cognitive sci-
ence) allowed us to not only uncover these classes and mechanisms
but to ground our speculative design method in existing research
about human memory. During the discussion of each workshop,
experts were able to comment on the likelihood of scenarios but
also discuss what potential positive and negative impacts such sce-
narios might have on the individual and society. In the following,
we present a discussion around potential positive and negative
directions which are partially coming out of the discussion of the
workshop and partially from our own reflection about our work
and prior literature.
9.1
The Good: One Step Closer to Augmenting
the Human Intellect
13 out of the 22 scenarios created and discussed in our workshop
were focused on positive applications, either to support a neurodi-
vergent population or to augment the abilities of neurotypical users.
Both of these could be seen as the augmentation of the human and
in particular the human intellect [39]. Douglas Engelbart presented
a conceptual framework focusing on increasing a user’s capability
to solve complex problems. He gives a set of examples of what these
capabilities might be: more-rapid comprehension, better comprehen-
sion, the possibility of gaining a useful degree of comprehension in a
situation that previously was too complex, speedier solutions, better
solutions, and the possibility of finding solutions to problems that
before seemed insoluble. These capabilities are partially referring to
the directive function of memory. By using XRMMs at encoding, a
user would have the possibility of gaining a useful degree of compre-
hension in a situation that previously was too complex. Steering the
user’s attention (e.g., “This You Should Remember” S6) or induc-
ing emotional stimuli (e.g., “You’ll Remember the Unlikely Risky
Event” S2) strengthens the memory of the experienced event and
can later lead to better performances due to the directive function
of memories. The particularly interesting part of this type of aug-
mentation, compared to Engelbart’s vision, is that XRMMs are not
an external tool that is used to perform a task better. XRMMs are a
tool to alter perception and memory and thereby change the self,
for better or for worse. The main difference is that once the tool is
removed, the augmentation still persists, unlike the examples given
in “Augmenting the Human Intellect”. This is also a core difference
between perceptual manipulations such as VPPMs and XRMMs.
XR is presenting a vehicle for these types of manipulations since
it is now possible to apply them to the real world and not only
on digital information. However, this interference with the human
perceptual and cognitive system comes with the price of the loss of
Perceptual Integrity.
9.2
The Bad: One Step Closer to Losing
Perceptual Integrity
The concept of Perceptual Integrity came up during the joint coding
session and the analysis of the free discussions that experts had
during the workshops. When discussing the scenario S6 where an
AI selects what the user should be attentive to (Figure 5), PXR5
mentioned that if “what is worth remembering is crowdsourced”,
users would “lose some part of their individuality”, which might
be “harmful for democracy and for thinking on our own”. Realizing
this distinguishment between a temporal augmentation through a
tool and a permanent augmentation through something like XR-
MMs, we discussed the idea that XR is capable of (sometimes even
unnoticeably) interfering with our perception of the real and virtual
world and thereby undermining our agency and trust in what we
are perceiving to be unaltered by technology (perceptual integrity).
This is particularly possible once the human cognitive system is
becoming part of the application design and once the developer can
leverage known thresholds to steer users towards actions or beliefs
through alterations of their subjective reality. The specific danger
we see with XRMMs compared to perceptual manipulations such as
Memory Manipulations in Extended Reality
CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany
VPPMs (e.g., redirected walking [123]) is that XRMMs have a longer-
term impact on users. Where redirected walking is leveraging a
threshold of the visual system to have an immediate impact on users’
physical movements, XRMMs are leveraging weak spots in our
cognitive system that are able to impact the users’ self-perception,
their social interactions, and decisions and behavior, through the
three AM functions (self, social and directive, section 2.1.1).
These findings are building on the works of prior researchers
that started to have similar concerns around the ability of XR to
influence and manipulate users perception. Roesner et al., presented
in 2014 [100] and 2021 [99] a set of potential challenges around
security and privacy of AR technology. They refer to the construct
of perceptual manipulations as “output security” and started to
propose structural changes from a security research’s perspective
on how to enable a safe [69] and secure [70] augmentation. Similar
to our interdisciplinary research approach, Baldassi et al., com-
bined neuroscience and computer science in their exploration of
the “output challenge” and presented one of the core challenges
to the ability of AR to manipulate the users sensory, perceptual
and cognitive system [8]. Our findings are adding to this research
directions by presenting a more detailed definition of perceptual
manipulations in general and a distinguishment between VPPMs
and XRMMs.
Distinguishing these two types of perceptual manipulations in
XR (VPPMs and XRMMs) allowed us to discover and articulate the
concept of perceptual integrity. XR as a technology mediates our
perception of reality. Consequently it strongly influences our per-
ceptual integrity, i.e., the extent to which our perception of reality
is sound and accurate. Approaches that manipulate or undermine
perceptual integrity using XR have thus far done so with the intent
to influence free will, agency and autonomy - impacting our be-
haviour, actions and reactions in the process. XRMMs and VPPMs
are two powerful examples of the potential for manipulating per-
ceptual integrity using XR, and exemplify the new risks posed to
perceptual integrity, particularly by the advent of everyday con-
sumer AR. We argue that both types of perceptual manipulations
are only working since they are breaking with the idea of percep-
tual integrity. However, one could argue that VR and AR are at
their core manipulating the perception of the user (e.g., visually
displaying digital content that does not exist in the physical world).
In addressing perceptual manipulations and their impact on per-
ceptual integrity, our research prompts a breadth of future research
questions that researchers need to urgently address before we arrive
at the point of ubiquitous XR. In particular: How should we balance
perceptual integrity against exploiting the advantages and capabili-
ties that XR-driven perceptual mediation unlocks? To what degree
do we allow perceptual manipulations to be applied? What mecha-
nisms are required to make users aware of potential or on-going
perceptual manipulations without breaking with the experience?
What new types of perceptual manipulations will XR enable, and
what opportunities, risks, and concerns do they pose? And perhaps
most fundamentally of all, who or what should be able to access
and utilize this capacity for perceptual manipulation, and under
what circumstances is this regulated by law? Such capabilities can
empower individuals - but they could also be used by other entities,
from businesses to governments, eager to influence or steer the
beliefs, attitudes, intentions and actions of users.
These are all questions that are currently similarly asked in the
field of Neurotechnology (technology that interfaces with the users
neural system and is able to monitor or modulate neural activities).
The Neurorights Foundation presented a set of five rules (Mental
Privacy, Personal Identity, Free Will, Fair Access to Mental Augmen-
tation and Protection from Bias) [44]. While all of them do similarly
apply to perceptual manipulations, the rule of Free Will (“Individu-
als should have ultimate control over their own decision making,
without unknown manipulation from external neurotechnologies.”)
is the best demonstration that perceptual manipulations in XR have
similar concerns and should work on a similar set of rules that try
to prevent abuse without constraining the powerful abilities of XR.
Slater et al., raises similar concerns around the power that realism
has in virtual environments [116].
9.3
The Ugly: Who is Responsible for the
Trajectory and what can the HCI
Community do?
An important question that we want to address is about the re-
sponsibility and trajectory of perceptual manipulation research. In
recent years, perceptual manipulation techniques have been fre-
quently published in the field of HCI and XR, mainly uncovering
interaction techniques that could leverage users’ perceptual thresh-
olds [5, 97, 122, 123]. While researchers are starting to explore
potential harms that could arise from XR and perceptual manipula-
tions [50, 83, 126], these works are mainly arising from the Safety,
Security and Privacy community [8, 69, 70, 99, 100]. XR and HCI
researchers are still dominantly focusing on the potential benefits
of perceptual manipulations and working towards understanding
and quantifying new thresholds. A good example is the field of
locomotion and redirected walking in Virtual Reality [97, 122, 123].
The majority of publications are focusing on even more precisely
detecting the perceptual thresholds of visual rotations. This leads
us to the second part of this question: Who is responsible and what
can HCI research contribute?
With this paper, we wanted to demonstrate how we imagine
future research around perceptual manipulations. We presented a
set of weak spots in human cognition that have the potential to
be leveraged in XR for positive and negative application scenarios.
The emphasis is on having a holistic perspective of potential threats
arising from this type of application. The abusive scenarios were
not an afterthought but an essential part of this research. Instead
of focusing on just the positive applications XRMMs could enable
(augmenting the human intellect), we present a more general explo-
ration, including and reflecting on the potential abusive scenarios
(e.g., perceptual integrity). With this paper, we want to present how
these four important fields (HCI, XR, Security, and Cognitive Sci-
ence) need to come together and present a critical reflection of their
contributions to the scientific field of XR perceptual manipulations.
10
LIMITATIONS
Using speculative design workshops comes with the risk of generat-
ing scenarios that are more fictional than grounded in our current
understanding of a subject. To be able to explore such a construct
as XRMMs, we needed to apply this method since the distribution
XR consumer devices is not yet at the point where this becomes
CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany
Bonnail et al.
possible. However, to still create a strong foundation in the two
respected fields (XR and Cognitive Science) we recruited experts
from the individual fields and build our workshop around known
and existing memory limitations. Additionally, we presented each
class of XRMM by giving examples of memory mechanisms which
could be leveraged, grounded in cognitive psychology research.
These examples are not exhaustive and could be extended by fu-
ture research about XRMMs. Since we used a collaborative coding
approach, we were not able to calculate Inter-Coder Reliability
(ICR) measures during the thematic analysis process. Independent
coding and ICR would have provided a more objective measure of
agreement. However, our collaborative approach allowed to reach
agreement through discussion and initiated an early reflection on
the data and the codebook. Also, most of the experts participating in
the workshop were participating from a Western European country
(11 out of 12 participants), but we did not collect any formal infor-
mation about their cultural background. On this basis, we cannot
claim any cultural diversity in the scenarios generated.
11
CONCLUSION
In this work we explored how XR could be used to manipulate mem-
ory. We ran three speculative design workshops (n=12), with XR
and memory researchers creating 48 XRMM scenarios. Through the-
matic analysis we arrived at a definition of XRMMs, distinguishing
them from other types of perceptual manipulations (e.g., VPPMs).
Additionally, we presented a framework of their core components,
and discussed three classes of XRMMs (at encoding, pre-retrieval,
at retrieval). To demonstrate the plausibility of our classes we pre-
sented a grounding of each in current XR and memory research.
The results of this paper allowed us to classify a new type of percep-
tual manipulation that has long-term impact on users. We present
a discussion about the benefits and risks of this type of perceptual
manipulation, taking us a step closer to augmenting the human
intellect - but at the cost of jeopardizing perceptual integrity.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was partly supported by French government funding
managed by the National Research Agency under the Investments
for the Future program (PIA) grant ANR-21-ESRE-0030 (CONTIN-
UUM). We thank all the workshop participants for their contribu-
tion, as well as the anonymous reviewers for their valuable feed-
backs.
REFERENCES
[1] Mahdi Nasrullah Al-Ameen, Matthew Wright, and Shannon Scielzo. 2015. To-
wards Making Random Passwords Memorable: Leveraging Users’ Cognitive
Ability Through Multiple Cues. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Confer-
ence on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’15). Association for Com-
puting Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2315–2324.
https://doi.org/10.1145/
2702123.2702241
[2] Cristina Alberini. 2011. The Role of Reconsolidation and the Dynamic Process of
Long-Term Memory Formation and Storage. Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience
5 (2011).
[3] Cristina M. Alberini and Joseph E. LeDoux. 2013. Memory Reconsolidation.
Current Biology 23, 17 (Sept. 2013), R746–R750. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.
2013.06.046
[4] Nadisha-Marie Aliman and Leon Kester. 2020.
Malicious Design in AIVR,
Falsehood and Cybersecurity-oriented Immersive Defenses. In 2020 IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Virtual Reality (AIVR). 130–137.
https://doi.org/10.1109/AIVR50618.2020.00031
[5] Mahdi Azmandian, Mark Hancock, Hrvoje Benko, Eyal Ofek, and Andrew D.
Wilson. 2016. Haptic Retargeting: Dynamic Repurposing of Passive Haptics for
Enhanced Virtual Reality Experiences. In Proceedings of the 2016 Chi Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1968–1979.
[6] Alan Baddeley, Vivien Lewis, Margery Eldridge, and Neil Thomson. 1984. Atten-
tion and Retrieval from Long-Term Memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General 113 (1984), 518–540. https://doi.org/10.1037/0096-3445.113.4.518
[7] Harry P. Bahrick. 2000. Long-Term Maintenance of Knowledge. (2000).
[8] Stefano Baldassi, Tadayoshi Kohno, Franziska Roesner, and Moqian Tian. 2018.
Challenges and New Directions in Augmented Reality, Computer Security,
and Neuroscience–Part 1: Risks to Sensation and Perception. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1806.10557 (2018). arXiv:1806.10557
[9] Emma Berry, Narinder Kapur, Lyndsay Williams, Steve Hodges, Peter Watson,
Gavin Smyth, James Srinivasan, Reg Smith, Barbara Wilson, and Ken Wood.
2007 Aug-Oct. The Use of a Wearable Camera, SenseCam, as a Pictorial Diary
to Improve Autobiographical Memory in a Patient with Limbic Encephalitis: A
Preliminary Report. Neuropsychological Rehabilitation 17, 4-5 (2007 Aug-Oct),
582–601. https://doi.org/10.1080/09602010601029780
[10] Agon Bexheti, Marc Langheinrich, Ivan Elhart, and Nigel Davies. 2019. Securely
Storing and Sharing Memory Cues in Memory Augmentation Systems: A Practi-
cal Approach. In 2019 IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Computing and
Communications (PerCom. 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1109/PERCOM.2019.8767389
[11] Mark Billinghurst, Adrian Clark, and Gun Lee. 2015. A Survey of Augmented
Reality. Foundations and Trends® in Human–Computer Interaction 8, 2-3 (March
2015), 73–272. https://doi.org/10.1561/1100000049
[12] Olaf Blanke, Lucie Bréchet, Robin Mange, Bruno Herbelin, Baptiste Gauthier,
and Andrea Serino. 2018. Viewing One’s Body during Encoding Boosts Episodic
Memory. https://doi.org/10.1101/318956
[13] Philippe Blondé, Jean-Charles Girardeau, Marco Sperduti, and Pascale Piolino.
2022. A Wandering Mind Is a Forgetful Mind: A Systematic Review on the
Influence of Mind Wandering on Episodic Memory Encoding. Neuroscience
& Biobehavioral Reviews 132 (Jan. 2022), 774–792.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
neubiorev.2021.11.015
[14] Susan Bluck, Nicole Alea, Tilmann Habermas, and David C. Rubin. 2005. A TALE
of Three Functions: The Self–Reported Uses of Autobiographical Memory. Social
Cognition 23, 1 (Feb. 2005), 91–117. https://doi.org/10.1521/soco.23.1.91.59198
[15] Joseph Bonneau and Stuart Schechter. 2014. Towards Reliable Storage of 56-
Bit Secrets in Human Memory. In 23rd USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX
Security 14). 607–623.
[16] Fred B. Bryant, Colette M. Smart, and Scott P. King. 2005. Using the Past
to Enhance the Present: Boosting Happiness Through Positive Reminiscence.
Journal of Happiness Studies 6, 3 (Sept. 2005), 227–260. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10902-005-3889-4
[17] Larry Cahill and James L. McGaugh. 1998. Mechanisms of Emotional Arousal
and Lasting Declarative Memory. Trends in Neurosciences 21, 7 (July 1998),
294–299. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0166-2236(97)01214-9
[18] Niamh Caprani, John Greaney, and Nicola Porter. 2006. A Review of Memory
Aid Devices for an Ageing Population. PsychNology Journal 4, 3 (2006), 205–243.
[19] Peter Casey, Ibrahim Baggili, and Ananya Yarramreddy. 2021. Immersive Virtual
Reality Attacks and the Human Joystick. IEEE Transactions on Dependable and
Secure Computing 18, 2 (March 2021), 550–562. https://doi.org/10.1109/TDSC.
2019.2907942
[20] Claude Castelluccia, Markus Duermuth, Maximilian Golla, and Fatma Deniz.
2017. Towards Implicit Visual Memory-Based Authentication. In Proceedings
2017 Network and Distributed System Security Symposium. Internet Society, San
Diego, CA. https://doi.org/10.14722/ndss.2017.23292
[21] Neil Charness, Ryan Best, and Dustin Souders. 2012.
Memory Function
and Supportive Technology. Gerontechnology : international journal on the
fundamental aspects of technology to serve the ageing society 11, 1 (2012),
10.4017/gt.2012.11.01.006.00. https://doi.org/10.4017/gt.2012.11.01.006.00
Memory Manipulations in Extended Reality
CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany
[22] Kaiming Cheng, Jeffery F Tian, Tadayoshi Kohno, and Franziska Roesner. 2023.
Exploring User Reactions and Mental Models Towards Perceptual Manipulation
Attacks in Mixed Reality. USENIX Security 2023 (2023), 18.
[23] Lung-Pan Cheng, Eyal Ofek, Christian Holz, Hrvoje Benko, and Andrew D.
Wilson. 2017. Sparse Haptic Proxy: Touch Feedback in Virtual Environments
Using a General Passive Prop. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’17). Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 3718–3728. https://doi.org/10.1145/3025453.
3025753
[24] Yi Fei Cheng, Hang Yin, Yukang Yan, Jan Gugenheimer, and David Lindlbauer.
2022. Towards Understanding Diminished Reality. In Proceedings of the 2022
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’22). Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3491102.3517452
[25] Sarah Clinch, Cathleen Cortis Mack, Geoff Ward, and Madeleine Steeds. 2021.
Technology-Mediated Memory Impairment. In Technology-Augmented Percep-
tion and Cognition, Tilman Dingler and Evangelos Niforatos (Eds.). Springer
International Publishing, Cham, 71–124.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-
30457-7_4
[26] Dan Cosley, Kathy Akey, Brian Alson, Jonathan Baxter, Mark Broomfield, Soy-
oung Lee, and Chethan Sarabu. 2009. Using Technologies to Support Reminis-
cence. In British Computer Society. 480–484.
[27] Nelson Cowan. 1988. Evolving Conceptions of Memory Storage, Selective Atten-
tion, and Their Mutual Constraints within the Human Information-Processing
System. Psychological bulletin 104, 2 (1988), 163.
[28] Fergus I. M. Craik, Richard Govoni, Moshe Naveh-Benjamin, and Nicole D.
Anderson. 1996. The Effects of Divided Attention on Encoding and Retrieval
Processes in Human Memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 125
(1996), 159–180. https://doi.org/10.1037/0096-3445.125.2.159
[29] Anne A. Cuperus and Ineke J. M. van der Ham. 2016.
Virtual Reality Re-
plays of Sports Performance: Effects on Memory, Feeling of Competence,
and Performance.
Learning and Motivation 56 (Nov. 2016), 48–52.
https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.lmot.2016.09.005
[30] Sauvik Das, David Lu, Taehoon Lee, Joanne Lo, and Jason I. Hong. 2019. The
Memory Palace: Exploring Visual-Spatial Paths for Strong, Memorable, Infre-
quent Authentication. In Proceedings of the 32nd Annual ACM Symposium on User
Interface Software and Technology (UIST ’19). Association for Computing Machin-
ery, New York, NY, USA, 1109–1121. https://doi.org/10.1145/3332165.3347917
[31] Nigel Davies, Adrian Friday, Sarah Clinch, Corina Sas, Marc Langheinrich,
Geoff Ward, and Albrecht Schmidt. 2015. Security and Privacy Implications
of Pervasive Memory Augmentation. IEEE Pervasive Computing 14 (Jan. 2015),
44–53. https://doi.org/10.1109/MPRV.2015.13
[32] Robert Desimone and John Duncan. 1995. Neural Mechanisms of Selective
Visual Attention. Annual review of neuroscience 18, 1 (1995), 193–222.
[33] JoAnn Difede and Judith Cukor. 2007. Virtual Reality Exposure Therapy for the
Treatment of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Following September 11, 2001. The
Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 68, 11 (Nov. 2007), 1682–1689. https://doi.org/10.
4088/JCP.v68n1102
[34] H.Q. Dinh, N. Walker, L.F. Hodges, Chang Song, and A. Kobayashi. 1999. Eval-
uating the Importance of Multi-Sensory Input on Memory and the Sense of
Presence in Virtual Environments. In Proceedings IEEE Virtual Reality (Cat. No.
99CB36316). 222–228. https://doi.org/10.1109/VR.1999.756955
[35] Jayesh Doolani, Matthew Wright, Rajesh Setty, and S M Taiabul Haque. 2021.
LociMotion: Towards Learning a Strong Authentication Secret in a Single Ses-
sion. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI ’21). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
1–13. https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445105
[36] John V. Draper, David B. Kaber, and John M. Usher. 1998. Telepresence. Human
Factors 40, 3 (Sept. 1998), 354–375. https://doi.org/10.1518/001872098779591386
[37] Hermann Ebbinghaus (1885). 1885. Memory: A Contribution to Experimental
Psychology. Annals of Neurosciences 20, 4 (1885), 155–156. https://doi.org/10.
5214/ans.0972.7531.200408
[38] Emmaline Drew Eliseev and Elizabeth J. Marsh. 2021. Externalizing Autobio-
graphical Memories in the Digital Age. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 25, 12 (Dec.
2021), 1072–1081. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2021.08.005
[39] Douglas C Engelbart. 1962. Augmenting human intellect: A conceptual frame-
work. Menlo Park, CA (1962), 21.
[40] Michael W. Eysenck and Mark T. Keane. 2020. Cognitive Psychology: A Student’s
Handbook. Psychology Press.
[41] Anna Felnhofer, Oswald D. Kothgassner, Mareike Schmidt, Anna-Katharina
Heinzle, Leon Beutl, Helmut Hlavacs, and Ilse Kryspin-Exner. 2015. Is Virtual
Reality Emotionally Arousing? Investigating Five Emotion Inducing Virtual
Park Scenarios. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies 82 (Oct. 2015),
48–56. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2015.05.004
[42] Andreas Rene Fender and Christian Holz. 2022. Causality-Preserving Asyn-
chronous Reality. In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (CHI ’22). Association for Computing Machinery, New York,
NY, USA, 1–15. https://doi.org/10.1145/3491102.3501836
[43] Ajoy S. Fernandes, Ranxiao Frances Wang, and Daniel J. Simons. 2015. Remem-
bering the Physical as Virtual: Source Confusion and Physical Interaction in
Augmented Reality. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGGRAPH Symposium on Applied
Perception (SAP ’15). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
127–130. https://doi.org/10.1145/2804408.2804423
[44] The Neurorights Foundation. 2021. Mission. Retrieved January 25, 2023 from
https://neurorightsfoundation.org/mission
[45] Doron Friedman, Rodrigo Pizarro, Keren Or-Berkers, Solène Neyret, Xueni Pan,
and Mel Slater. 2014. A Method for Generating an Illusion of Backwards Time
Travel Using Immersive Virtual Reality—an Exploratory Study. Frontiers in
psychology 5 (2014), 943.
[46] Maryrose Gerardi, Barbara Olasov Rothbaum, Kerry Ressler, Mary Heekin, and
Albert Rizzo. 2008. Virtual reality exposure therapy using a virtual Iraq: Case
report. Journal of Traumatic Stress 21, 2 (2008), 209–213.
https://doi.org/10.
1002/jts.20331
[47] Mar Gonzalez-Franco and Jaron Lanier. 2017. Model of Illusions and Virtual
Reality. Frontiers in Psychology 8 (2017), 1125. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.
2017.01125
[48] Jan Gugenheimer. 2016. Nomadic Virtual Reality: Exploring New Interaction
Concepts for Mobile Virtual Reality Head-Mounted Displays. In Proceedings of
the 29th Annual Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology. 9–12.
[49] Jan Gugenheimer, Christian Mai, Mark McGill, Julie Williamson, Frank Steinicke,
and Ken Perlin. 2019. Challenges Using Head-Mounted Displays in Shared and
Social Spaces. In Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems. 1–8.
[50] Jan Gugenheimer, Mark McGill, Samuel Huron, Christian Mai, Julie Williamson,
and Michael Nebeling. 2020. Exploring Potentially Abusive Ethical, Social and
Political Implications of Mixed Reality Research in HCI. In Extended Abstracts
of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA
’20). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–8. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3334480.3375180
[51] Cathal Gurrin, Alan F. Smeaton, and Aiden R. Doherty. 2014. LifeLogging:
Personal Big Data. Foundations and Trends® in Information Retrieval 8, 1 (June
2014), 1–125. https://doi.org/10.1561/1500000033
[52] Morgan Harvey, Marc Langheinrich, and Geoff Ward. 2016. Remembering
through Lifelogging: A Survey of Human Memory Augmentation. Pervasive
and Mobile Computing 27 (April 2016), 14–26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pmcj.
2015.12.002
[53] Linda A. Henkel. 2014. Point-and-Shoot Memories: The Influence of Taking
Photos on Memory for a Museum Tour. Psychological Science 25, 2 (Feb. 2014),
396–402. https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797613504438
[54] Jan Herling and Wolfgang Broll. 2012. Pixmix: A Real-Time Approach to High-
Quality Diminished Reality. In 2012 IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and
Augmented Reality (ISMAR). IEEE, 141–150.
[55] H.G. Hoffman, K.C. Hullfish, and S.J. Houston. 1995. Virtual-Reality Monitoring.
In Proceedings Virtual Reality Annual International Symposium ’95. 48–54. https:
//doi.org/10.1109/VRAIS.1995.512479
[56] Hunter G. Hoffman, Azucena Garcia-Palacios, Ayanna K. Thomas, and Anne
Schmidt. 2001. Virtual Reality Monitoring: Phenomenal Characteristics of Real,
Virtual, and False Memories. CyberPsychology & Behavior 4, 5 (Oct. 2001),
565–572. https://doi.org/10.1089/109493101753235151
[57] Ellen Isaacs, Artie Konrad, Alan Walendowski, Thomas Lennig, Victoria Hollis,
and Steve Whittaker. 2013. Echoes from the Past: How Technology Mediated
Reflection Improves Well-Being. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1071–1080.
[58] Matthew Jamieson, Breda Cullen, Marilyn McGee-Lennon, Stephen Brewster,
and Jonathan J. Evans. 2014. The Efficacy of Cognitive Prosthetic Technology
for People with Memory Impairments: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.
Neuropsychological Rehabilitation 24, 3-4 (July 2014), 419–444. https://doi.org/
10.1080/09602011.2013.825632
[59] Matthew Jamieson, Brian O’Neill, Breda Cullen, Marilyn Lennon, Stephen
Brewster, and Jonathan Evans. 2017. ForgetMeNot: Active Reminder Entry
Support for Adults with Acquired Brain Injury. In Proceedings of the 2017
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’17). Associ-
ation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 6012–6023.
https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025888
[60] Marcia K. Johnson, Shahin Hashtroudi, and D. Stephen Lindsay. 1993. Source
Monitoring. Psychological Bulletin 114, 1 (1993), 3–28. https://doi.org/10.1037/
0033-2909.114.1.3
[61] Marcia K. Johnson and Carol L. Raye. 1981. Reality Monitoring. Psychological
Review 88, 1 (1981), 67–85. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.88.1.67
[62] Zeinab Joudaki, Julie Thorpe, and Miguel Vargas Martin. 2018. Reinforcing
System-Assigned Passphrases Through Implicit Learning. In Proceedings of the
2018 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security (CCS
’18). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1533–1548.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3243734.3243764
CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany
Bonnail et al.
[63] Joanna Kisker, Thomas Gruber, and Benjamin Schöne. 2021. Virtual Reality
Experiences Promote Autobiographical Retrieval Mechanisms: Electrophysio-
logical Correlates of Laboratory and Virtual Experiences. Psychological Research
85, 7 (Oct. 2021), 2485–2501. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00426-020-01417-x
[64] Cadu Klier and Luciano Grüdtner Buratto. 2020. Stress and Long-Term Memory
Retrieval: A Systematic Review. Trends in Psychiatry and Psychotherapy 42, 3
(2020), 284–291. https://doi.org/10.1590/2237-6089-2019-0077
[65] Artie Konrad, Ellen Isaacs, and Steve Whittaker. 2016. Technology-Mediated
Memory: Is Technology Altering Our Memories And Interfering With Well-
Being? ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction 23, 4 (Aug. 2016),
23:1–23:29. https://doi.org/10.1145/2934667
[66] Artie Konrad, Simon Tucker, John Crane, and Steve Whittaker. 2016. Technology
and Reflection: Mood and Memory Mechanisms for Well-Being. Psychology of
Well-Being 6 (2016), 5. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13612-016-0045-3
[67] Michael Kotlyar, Christopher Donahue, Paul Thuras, Matt G. Kushner, Natalie
O’Gorman, Erin A Smith, and David E. Adson. 2008. Physiological Response to
a Speech Stressor Presented in a Virtual Reality Environment. Psychophysiology
45, 6 (2008), 1034–1037. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-8986.2008.00690.x
[68] Eric Krokos, Catherine Plaisant, and Amitabh Varshney. 2019. Virtual Memory
Palaces: Immersion Aids Recall. Virtual Reality 23, 1 (March 2019), 1–15. https:
//doi.org/10.1007/s10055-018-0346-3
[69] Kiron Lebeck, Tadayoshi Kohno, and Franziska Roesner. 2016. How to Safely
Augment Reality: Challenges and Directions. In Proceedings of the 17th Interna-
tional Workshop on Mobile Computing Systems and Applications. 45–50.
[70] Kiron Lebeck, Kimberly Ruth, Tadayoshi Kohno, and Franziska Roesner. 2017.
Securing Augmented Reality Output. In 2017 IEEE Symposium on Security and
Privacy (SP). IEEE, 320–337.
[71] Eric L. G. Legge, Christopher R. Madan, Enoch T. Ng, and Jeremy B. Caplan.
2012. Building a Memory Palace in Minutes: Equivalent Memory Performance
Using Virtual versus Conventional Environments with the Method of Loci. Acta
Psychologica 141, 3 (Nov. 2012), 380–390. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actpsy.2012.
09.002
[72] Eric L. G. Legge, Christopher R. Madan, Enoch T. Ng, and Jeremy B. Caplan.
2012. Building a Memory Palace in Minutes: Equivalent Memory Performance
Using Virtual versus Conventional Environments with the Method of Loci. Acta
Psychologica 141, 3 (Nov. 2012), 380–390. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actpsy.2012.
09.002
[73] Diane Lenormand and Pascale Piolino. 2022. In Search of a Naturalistic Neu-
roimaging Approach: Exploration of General Feasibility through the Case of
VR-fMRI and Application in the Domain of Episodic Memory. Neuroscience
& Biobehavioral Reviews 133 (Feb. 2022), 104499.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
neubiorev.2021.12.022
[74] David Lindlbauer and Andy D. Wilson. 2018. Remixed Reality: Manipulating
Space and Time in Augmented Reality. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’18). Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3173703
[75] Elizabeth F. Loftus. 2005. Planting Misinformation in the Human Mind: A 30-
Year Investigation of the Malleability of Memory. Learning & Memory 12, 4 (Jan.
2005), 361–366. https://doi.org/10.1101/lm.94705
[76] Elizabeth F. Loftus and Jacqueline E. Pickrell. 1995. The Formation of False
Memories. Psychiatric Annals 25, 12 (Dec. 1995), 720–725. https://doi.org/10.
3928/0048-5713-19951201-07
[77] Dominique Makowski, Marco Sperduti, Serge Nicolas, and Pascale Piolino. 2017.
“Being There” and Remembering It: Presence Improves Memory Encoding. Con-
sciousness and cognition 53 (2017), 194–202.
[78] Marieke AG Martens, Angus Antley, Daniel Freeman, Mel Slater, Paul J Harrison,
and Elizabeth M Tunbridge. 2019. It Feels Real: Physiological Responses to a
Stressful Virtual Reality Environment and Its Impact on Working Memory.
Journal of Psychopharmacology 33, 10 (Oct. 2019), 1264–1273. https://doi.org/
10.1177/0269881119860156
[79] Sebastian Marwecki, Andrew D. Wilson, Eyal Ofek, Mar Gonzalez Franco, and
Christian Holz. 2019. Mise-Unseen: Using Eye Tracking to Hide Virtual Reality
Scene Changes in Plain Sight. In Proceedings of the 32nd Annual ACM Symposium
on User Interface Software and Technology (UIST ’19). Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 777–789.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3332165.
3347919
[80] A. McDonald, C. Haslam, P. Yates, B. Gurr, G. Leeder, and A. Sayers. 2011. Google
Calendar: A New Memory Aid to Compensate for Prospective Memory Deficits
Following Acquired Brain Injury. Neuropsychological Rehabilitation 21, 6 (Dec.
2011), 784–807. https://doi.org/10.1080/09602011.2011.598405
[81] James L McGaugh and Benno Roozendaal. 2002. Role of Adrenal Stress Hor-
mones in Forming Lasting Memories in the Brain. Current Opinion in Neurobiol-
ogy 12, 2 (April 2002), 205–210. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0959-4388(02)00306-9
[82] Arthur W. Melton. 1963. Implications of Short-Term Memory for a General
Theory of Memory. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 2, 1 (July
1963), 1–21. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-5371(63)80063-8
[83] Abraham Hani Mhaidli and Florian Schaub. 2021. Identifying Manipulative
Advertising Techniques in XR Through Scenario Construction. In Proceedings
of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’21).
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–18. https://doi.
org/10.1145/3411764.3445253
[84] Paul Milgram and Fumio Kishino. 1994. A Taxonomy of Mixed Reality Visual
Displays. IEICE Trans. Information Systems vol. E77-D, no. 12 (Dec. 1994), 1321–
1329.
[85] Shohei Mori, Sei Ikeda, and Hideo Saito. 2017. A Survey of Diminished Reality:
Techniques for Visually Concealing, Eliminating, and Seeing through Real
Objects. IPSJ Transactions on Computer Vision and Applications 9, 1 (June 2017),
17. https://doi.org/10.1186/s41074-017-0028-1
[86] Robert A. Nash, Kimberley A. Wade, and D. Stephen Lindsay. 2009. Digitally
Manipulating Memory: Effects of Doctored Videos and Imagination in Distorting
Beliefs and Memories. Memory & Cognition 37, 4 (June 2009), 414–424. https:
//doi.org/10.3758/MC.37.4.414
[87] BBC World News. 2020. Click, Virtual Time Machine: Watching My Life from 2019.
Retrieved January 25, 2023 from https://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p08nwkw4
[88] Alasdair Newson, Andrés Almansa, Matthieu Fradet, Yann Gousseau, and Patrick
Pérez. 2013. Towards Fast, Generic Video Inpainting. In Proceedings of the 10th
European Conference on Visual Media Production (CVMP ’13). Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–8.
https://doi.org/10.1145/
2534008.2534019
[89] OpenAI. 2022. DALL·E 2. Retrieved January 25, 2023 from https://openai.com/
dall-e-2/
[90] Sylvain Penaud, Najate Jebara, Mohamed Zaoui, Eric Orriols, Alain Berthoz,
and Pascale Piolino. 2022. Episodic Memory and Self-Reference in a Naturalistic
Context: New Insights Based on a Virtual Walk in the Latin Quarter of Paris.
Journal of Environmental Psychology 81 (2022), 101801.
[91] James W. Pennebaker and Sandra K. Beall. 1986. Confronting a Traumatic
Event: Toward an Understanding of Inhibition and Disease. Journal of abnormal
psychology 95, 3 (1986), 274.
[92] PetaPixel. 2018. Facebook Can Reconstruct a 3D World from Your Photos and Videos.
Retrieved January 25, 2023 from https://petapixel.com/2018/05/02/facebook-
can-reconstruct-a-3d-world-from-your-photos-and-videos/
[93] Elizabeth A Phelps. 2004. Human Emotion and Memory: Interactions of the
Amygdala and Hippocampal Complex. Current Opinion in Neurobiology 14, 2
(April 2004), 198–202. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conb.2004.03.015
[94] Laurence Picard, Maria Abram, Eric Orriols, and Pascale Piolino. 2017. Virtual Re-
ality as an Ecologically Valid Tool for Assessing Multifaceted Episodic Memory
in Children and Adolescents. International Journal of Behavioral Development
41, 2 (March 2017), 211–219. https://doi.org/10.1177/0165025415616198
[95] Michael I. Posner, Mary J. Nissen, and Raymond M. Klein. 1976. Visual Dom-
inance: An Information-Processing Account of Its Origins and Significance.
Psychological review 83, 2 (1976), 157.
[96] Zhen Qin, Qingliang Zeng, Yixin Zong, and Fan Xu. 2021. Image Inpainting
Based on Deep Learning: A Review. Displays 69 (Sept. 2021), 102028.
https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.displa.2021.102028
[97] Sharif Razzaque, David Swapp, Mel Slater, Mary Whitton, and Anthony Steed.
2002. Redirected Walking in Place. Eight Eurographics Workshop on Virtual
Environments (Jan. 2002).
[98] E. F. Risko, M. O. Kelly, P. Patel, and C. Gaspar. 2019. Offloading Memory Leaves
Us Vulnerable to Memory Manipulation. Cognition 191 (Oct. 2019), 103954.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2019.04.023
[99] Franziska Roesner and Tadayoshi Kohno. 2021. Security and Privacy for Aug-
mented Reality: Our 10-Year Retrospective. In VR4Sec: 1st International Workshop
on Security for XR and XR for Security.
[100] Franziska Roesner, Tadayoshi Kohno, and David Molnar. 2014. Security and
Privacy for Augmented Reality Systems. Commun. ACM 57, 4 (2014), 88–96.
[101] Oscar Rosello, Marc Exposito, and Pattie Maes. 2016. NeverMind: Using Aug-
mented Reality for Memorization. In Proceedings of the 29th Annual Sym-
posium on User Interface Software and Technology (UIST ’16 Adjunct). Asso-
ciation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 215–216.
https:
//doi.org/10.1145/2984751.2984776
[102] Marius Rubo, Nadine Messerli, and Simone Munsch. 2021. The Human Source
Memory System Struggles to Distinguish Virtual Reality and Reality. Computers
in Human Behavior Reports 4 (Aug. 2021), 100111. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chbr.
2021.100111
[103] Maria V. Sanchez-Vives and Mel Slater. 2005. From Presence to Consciousness
through Virtual Reality. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 6, 4 (April 2005), 332–339.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn1651
[104] Susan J. Sara. 2000. Retrieval and Reconsolidation: Toward a Neurobiology of
Remembering. Learning & Memory 7, 2 (Jan. 2000), 73–84. https://doi.org/10.
1101/lm.7.2.73
[105] Corina Sas and Steve Whittaker. 2013. Design for Forgetting: Disposing of Digital
Possessions after a Breakup. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’13). Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 1823–1832. https://doi.org/10.1145/2470654.2466241
[106] Daniel L. Schacter. 2002. The Seven Sins of Memory: How the Mind Forgets and
Remembers. HMH.
Memory Manipulations in Extended Reality
CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany
[107] Daniel L. Schacter. 2022. Media, Technology, and the Sins of Memory. Memory,
Mind & Media 1 (2022), e1. https://doi.org/10.1017/mem.2021.3
[108] Daniel L. Schacter and Chad S. Dodson. 2001. Misattribution, False Recognition
and the Sins of Memory. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of
London. Series B: Biological Sciences 356, 1413 (Sept. 2001), 1385–1393. https:
//doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2001.0938
[109] Kathryn Y. Segovia and Jeremy N. Bailenson. 2009. Virtually True: Children’s
Acquisition of False Memories in Virtual Reality. Media Psychology 12, 4 (Nov.
2009), 371–393. https://doi.org/10.1080/15213260903287267
[110] Abigail J. Sellen, Andrew Fogg, Mike Aitken, Steve Hodges, Carsten Rother, and
Ken Wood. 2007. Do Life-Logging Technologies Support Memory for the Past?
An Experimental Study Using Sensecam. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’07). Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 81–90. https://doi.org/10.1145/1240624.1240636
[111] Andrew M. Sherrill, Alex O. Rothbaum, Lauren B. McSweeney, and Barbara O.
Rothbaum. 2019. Virtual Reality Exposure Therapy for Posttraumatic Stress
Disorder. Psychiatric Annals 49, 8 (Aug. 2019), 343–347. https://doi.org/10.3928/
00485713-20190716-02
[112] R. M. Shiffrin and R. C. Atkinson. 1969. Storage and Retrieval Processes in
Long-Term Memory. Psychological Review 76 (1969), 179–193. https://doi.org/
10.1037/h0027277
[113] Youngsoo Shin, Ruth Barankevich, Jina Lee, and Saleh Kalantari. 2021. PEN-
CODER: Design for Prospective Memory and Older Adults. In Extended Ab-
stracts of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI EA ’21). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–7.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3411763.3451795
[114] Panote Siriaraya and Chee Siang Ang. 2014. Recreating Living Experiences
from Past Memories through Virtual Worlds for People with Dementia. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI ’14). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 3977–3986.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557035
[115] Mel Slater. 2009. Place Illusion and Plausibility Can Lead to Realistic Behaviour
in Immersive Virtual Environments. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society B: Biological Sciences 364, 1535 (2009), 3549–3557.
[116] Mel Slater, Cristina Gonzalez-Liencres, Patrick Haggard, Charlotte Vinkers, Re-
becca Gregory-Clarke, Steve Jelley, Zillah Watson, Graham Breen, Raz Schwarz,
William Steptoe, et al. 2020. The Ethics of Realism in Virtual and Augmented
Reality. Frontiers in Virtual Reality 1 (2020), 1.
[117] Mel Slater and Sylvia Wilbur. 1997. A Framework for Immersive Virtual Envi-
ronments (FIVE): Speculations on the Role of Presence in Virtual Environments.
Presence: Teleoperators & Virtual Environments 6, 6 (1997), 603–616.
[118] S. Adam Smith. 2019. Virtual Reality in Episodic Memory Research: A Review.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review 26, 4 (Aug. 2019), 1213–1237. https://doi.org/10.
3758/s13423-019-01605-w
[119] Bernhard Spanlang, Jean-Marie Normand, David Borland, Konstantina Kilteni,
Elias Giannopoulos, Ausiàs Pomés, Mar González-Franco, Daniel Perez-Marcos,
Jorge Arroyo-Palacios, Xavi Navarro Muncunill, and Mel Slater. 2014. How to
Build an Embodiment Lab: Achieving Body Representation Illusions in Virtual
Reality. Frontiers in Robotics and AI 1 (2014).
[120] Jonathan D Spence. 1984. The Memory Palace of Matteo Ricci. Viking.
[121] Stability.Ai. 2022. Stable Diffusion 2.0 Release. Retrieved January 25, 2023 from
https://stability.ai/blog/stable-diffusion-v2-release
[122] Frank Steinicke, Gerd Bruder, Jason Jerald, Harald Frenz, and Markus Lappe.
2010. Estimation of Detection Thresholds for Redirected Walking Techniques.
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 16, 1 (Jan. 2010),
17–27. https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2009.62
[123] Qi Sun, Anjul Patney, Li-Yi Wei, Omer Shapira, Jingwan Lu, Paul Asente, Suwen
Zhu, Morgan Mcguire, David Luebke, and Arie Kaufman. 2018. Towards Virtual
Reality Infinite Walking: Dynamic Saccadic Redirection. ACM Transactions on
Graphics 37, 4 (July 2018), 67:1–67:13. https://doi.org/10.1145/3197517.3201294
[124] Charles P. Thompson, John J. Skowronski, Steen F. Larsen, and Andrew L. Betz.
2013. Autobiographical Memory: Remembering What and Remembering When.
Psychology Press.
[125] Yung-Chin Tsao, Chun-Chieh Shu, and Tian-Syung Lan. 2019. Development
of a Reminiscence Therapy System for the Elderly Using the Integration of
Virtual Reality and Augmented Reality. Sustainability 11, 17 (Jan. 2019), 4792.
https://doi.org/10.3390/su11174792
[126] Wen-Jie Tseng, Elise Bonnail, Mark McGill, Mohamed Khamis, Eric Leco-
linet, Samuel Huron, and Jan Gugenheimer. 2022.
The Dark Side of Per-
ceptual Manipulations in Virtual Reality.
arXiv:2202.13200 [cs] (Feb. 2022).
https://doi.org/10.1145/3491102.3517728 arXiv:2202.13200 [cs]
[127] Chai M. Tyng, Hafeez U. Amin, Mohamad N. M. Saad, and Aamir S. Malik. 2017.
The Influences of Emotion on Learning and Memory. Frontiers in Psychology 8
(Aug. 2017), 1454. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2017.01454
[128] Eunjoon “Rachel” Um, Jan L. Plass, Elizabeth O. Hayward, and Bruce D. Homer.
2012. Emotional Design in Multimedia Learning. Journal of Educational Psy-
chology 104, 2 (2012), 485–498. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0026609
[129] Melina R. Uncapher and Michael D. Rugg. 2009. Selecting for Memory? The
Influence of Selective Attention on the Mnemonic Binding of Contextual In-
formation.
Journal of Neuroscience 29, 25 (June 2009), 8270–8279.
https:
//doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1043-09.2009
[130] Robert J. van Beers, Daniel M. Wolpert, and Patrick Haggard. 2002. When
Feeling Is More Important than Seeing in Sensorimotor Adaptation. Current
biology 12, 10 (2002), 834–837.
[131] Joakim Vindenes, Angelica Ortiz de Gortari, and Barbara Wasson. 2018.
Mnemosyne: Adapting the Method of Loci to Immersive Virtual Reality. In
Augmented Reality, Virtual Reality, and Computer Graphics (Lecture Notes in Com-
puter Science), Lucio Tommaso De Paolis and Patrick Bourdot (Eds.). Springer
International Publishing, Cham, 205–213. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-
95270-3_16
[132] Oriol Vinyals, Alexander Toshev, Samy Bengio, and Dumitru Erhan. 2015. Show
and Tell: A Neural Image Caption Generator. In Proceedings of the IEEE Confer-
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 3156–3164.
[133] Susanne Vogel and Lars Schwabe. 2016. Learning and Memory under Stress:
Implications for the Classroom. npj Science of Learning 1, 1 (June 2016), 1–10.
https://doi.org/10.1038/npjscilearn.2016.11
[134] Kimberley A. Wade, Maryanne Garry, J. Don Read, and D. Stephen Lindsay.
2002. A Picture Is Worth a Thousand Lies: Using False Photographs to Create
False Childhood Memories. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review 9, 3 (Sept. 2002),
597–603. https://doi.org/10.3758/BF03196318
[135] Oliver T Wolf. 2017. Stress and Memory Retrieval: Mechanisms and Con-
sequences.
Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences 14 (April 2017), 40–46.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cobeha.2016.12.001
[136] Bob Woods, Laura O’Philbin, Emma M. Farrell, Aimee E. Spector, and Mar-
tin Orrell. 2018. Reminiscence Therapy for Dementia. Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews 3 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD001120.pub3
[137] Jiaxin Xu and Baosheng Wang. 2020. Efficacy of VR-Based Reminiscence Ther-
apy in Improving Autobiographical Memory for Chinese Patients with AD.
339–349. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-51038-1_47
[138] Yuki Yamada, Keisuke Irie, Kota Gushima, Fumiko Ishizawa, Mohammed Al Sada,
and Tatsuo Nakajima. 2017. HoloMoL: Human Memory Augmentation with
Mixed-Reality Technologies. In Proceedings of the 21st International Academic
Mindtrek Conference (AcademicMindtrek ’17). Association for Computing Ma-
chinery, New York, NY, USA, 235–238. https://doi.org/10.1145/3131085.3131097
[139] Zhong-Qiu Zhao, Peng Zheng, Shou-Tao Xu, and Xindong Wu. 2019. Object
Detection With Deep Learning: A Review. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks
and Learning Systems 30, 11 (Nov. 2019), 3212–3232. https://doi.org/10.1109/
TNNLS.2018.2876865
[140] Patrick Zimmer, Benjamin Buttlar, Georg Halbeisen, Eva Walther, and Gregor
Domes. 2019. Virtually Stressed? A Refined Virtual Reality Adaptation of the
Trier Social Stress Test (TSST) Induces Robust Endocrine Responses. Psychoneu-
roendocrinology 101 (March 2019), 186–192. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psyneuen.
2018.11.010
CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany
Bonnail et al.
Id
Name
Author
Description
Class
S1
Peak-End Rule
PXR2
Positive emotions are induced during the XR experience, to increase positive memories and overall
happiness. This manipulation is implemented by the developers to make users come back to the app.
At encoding
Influencing encoding
by inducing emotions
S2
You’ll Remember
the Unlikely Event
PM1
Risky and stressful events are simulated when learning how to drive, so the important
lessons are better remembered. This manipulation is a feature of the training app.
S3
Make Forget
PXR4
An attacker add distractions in other user’s AR filed of view, to make them less attentive and forget
what they just did, to make them vulnerable to other attacks (e.g., stealing money).
At encoding
Influencing encoding
by steering attention
S4
Attention Detector
PM3
An AR app helps users with Attention Deficit Disorder (ADD) to detect and notify them when
they are not attentive, to increase the chance of correctly encoding events.
S5
Encoding Enhancer
PM4
An AR app helps users in a learning context by blurring distractions and contextual information
(sounds, objects, movements...), to help them focus and enhance encoding.
S6
This You Should
Remember
PXR5
An AR app proposes to support encoding, through an AI which selects what users should remember, by
highlighting important elements and blurring distractions (fig.5).
S7
Traumatic Memory
PM2
During a therapy, patients suffering from PTSD are exposed to their trauma in VR, to reduce flashbacks.
At retrieval
Influencing perception
through reflection
S8
Therapy
PM2
During a therapy, patients are immersed in the context of a past event in VR, to help them analyse
the situation and understand the past better.
S9
Couple Game
PXR3
A VR game allows couples to experience each other memories,
to help them understand each other better.
S10
Dysmorphia
PM3
During a therapy, patients suffering from dysmorphia can revisit their memories in VR
to correct their self-perception thanks to embodiment.
S11
Memory Training
PM4
A VR app proposes to insert users’ relatives in VR entertaining content
to help users suffering from dementia to remember their relatives.
S12
Shame Reminder
PXR4
An AR app reminds users’ of memories linked to places. This app makes profit by reviving
traumatic memories, because users have to pay to stop being reminded of them.
S13
Naked Man VR
PXR5
An attacker inadvertently exposes VR users to reconstruction of traumatic events,
to harm their mental state and make them vulnerable.
S14
Speech
PM1
A VR speech training app proposes to re-experience previous speech performances, through 3D
reconstructions. These reconstructions are positively altered, to enhance user’s self-perception.
At retrieval
Distorting memories
through suggestions
S15
Real Estate
PXR1
A real estate company alters VR reconstructions of properties, so that memories of potential
buyers who revisit them in VR are distorted and more positive, to influence them to buy them.
S16
Judge Training
PM1
A judge training VR app proposes to visit reconstructions of previous trials. These reconstructions
are altered by changing people’s gender and race to help judges reducing bias.
S17
Parallel Album
PXR3
An attacker alters VR family albums of an old man, to blur their souvenirs and make them vulnerable.
S18
Buy a Friend
PXR4
A VR social media to share immersive memories allows premium users to be inserted
in other users’ memories (fig.6).
S19
Burning Stove
PXR6
An attacker displays previously experienced events in the AR user’s field of view,
to make them mix memories of the past with the present, and make them vulnerable.
S20
What’s Up Girl
PXR5
VR is used to relieve past experiences. An attacker alters the recordings, to
distort people’s memories and alter their relationships.
S21
AR Eraser
PXR2
An AR app proposes to help forgetting someone, by hiding all the objects linked
to that person (fig.7).
Pre-retrieval
Induce forgetting
by removing cues
S22
False Training App
PXR1
In a VR quiz application, users are immersed in a stressful environment to make them forget
the answers and feel incompetent, to make they buy a training product.
Pre-retrieval
Induce forgetting
by inducing stress
S23
College Dropout Spam
PM5
An AR app adds advertisement in the user’s field of view in exchange of free education content.
Not considered as XRMM
S24
Smell
PXR6
An XR app to consult products adds smells to trigger emotion and create a comfortable
environment, to make users buy their products.
S25
Stranger Things’ Effect
PM5
A VR entertaining app integrates cultural content related to the user’s youth (e.g., music),
to make people enjoy the content.
Table 3: Short description and categorization of the XRMM scenarios generated by participants and discussed during the
workshops.
