Participatory Conceptual Design of Accessible Digital 
Musical Instruments using Generative AI 
 
 
Hugh Aynsley 
Creative Technologies Lab  
 University of the West of England   
Coldharbour Lane 
Bristol, UK BS16 1QY 
Hugh2.Aynsley@live.uwe.ac.uk   
 
 
Tom Mitchell 
Creative Technologies Lab  
University of the West of England  
Coldharbour Lane 
Bristol, UK BS16 1QY 
tom.mitchell@uwe.ac.uk 
 
 
Dave Meckin 
The Royal College of Art  
 Kensington Gore, South 
Kensington 
London SW7 2EU 
dave.meckin@rca.ac.uk 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
This paper explores the potential of AI text-to-image diffusion models 
(e.g. DALLE-2 and Midjourney) to support the early phase design of 
new digital musical instruments in collaboration with Disabled 
musicians. The paper presents initial findings from two speculative 
design workshops attended by Disabled participants who are affiliated 
with the London-based inclusive arts organisation Joy of Sound. The 
workshops included activities that enabled participants to co-create 
speculative images of new instruments, drawing on their own 
contributions. These included the overall appearance of the instrument, 
constituent materials and other design characteristics. The paper 
discusses the generated images and examines how diffusion models 
can be a useful tool to support the conceptual co-design phase of 
bespoke accessible instruments. The project findings indicate that 
diffusion models can be useful as a facilitatory tool for idea generation 
 in the initial stages of instrument design. 
Author Keywords 
 ADMI, Accessibility, Participatory Design, AI. 
CCS Concepts 
• Human-centered computing → Accessibility→ Accessibility 
design and evaluation methods; • Human-centered computing→ 
Interaction design → Interaction design process and methods → 
Participatory design; 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Creating visual imagery is a critical step in the prototype stage of new 
technologies as they can give us an insight into the designer’s intension 
and help to situate ourselves within unknown worlds [28]. There are 
many ways to involve individual end-users in conceptual design of 
objects and tools [24] including methods specifically intended to 
support the participation of Disabled people [6]. This paper contributes 
a novel approach using AI text-to-image generators to catalyse the 
participatory co-design process. Participatory and collaborative design 
methods typically acknowledge that people who are affected by a 
design decision, event or product should have an opportunity to 
influence it [1]. This has been previously explored in for Accessible 
Digital Musical Instrument (ADMI) design by Ward who suggests 
that the users and those who work closely with them will best know 
their needs in terms of interacting with an instrument [29]. 
  The design and development of bespoke ADMIs is often a long 
process which can use a lot of resources [9]. Due to the bespoke nature 
of the instruments, designers may go through several revisions before 
reaching a playable and suitable interface for the end user [16]. 
Although there are advancements in rapid prototyping technologies 
such as 3D printing and CNC milling, the design of bespoke 
instruments remains a process only available to the minority of 
Disabled musicians that will benefit from bespoke interfaces [10].  
  The approach presented in this paper invites end-users to shape 
instrument design from the outset in line with their own stylistic and 
artistic preferences. In order to explore the potential of new accessible 
ideation methods for traditional design processes, two workshops were 
organised with Disabled participants from the inclusive arts 
organisation Joy of Sound [17]. The workshops explore new ways to 
co-design musical instruments using text-to-image generative AI, 
focusing on the use of rapid visualisation tools to encourage 
participation and interpret and explore participants' instructions. The 
main objective of this work is to investigate the potential of AI image 
to text generators and diffusion-based image generation systems in the 
design of ADMIs for disabled people. 
  The remainder of the paper sets out the context of ADMIs and 
generative AI before introducing the key motivation for this work. The 
workshops are discussed in Section 4 which encouraged workshop 
participants to develop a speculative design of new musical instrument 
designs using DALLE-2. The workshop outcomes are shown in 
Figures 1 and 2 are discussed in initial findings of the paper. The paper 
closes with concluding remarks and proposals for future development. 
 
2. BACKGROUND 
The strive to make music and creative arts activities accessible to the 
greater population has resulted in a wide range of novel approaches 
and technologies [9]. ADMIs is a term which is gaining popularity, 
especially within the NIME community as enabling technological 
tools, used for musical purposes [18] which act as an interface to active 
participation in the arts. ADMI technologies enable people who cannot 
play traditional musical instruments to engage in musical activities, 
without external sources assisting in the music process [11]. 
  Several systematic literature reviews look at the impact of 
participatory arts for wellbeing and music and has identified music 
making as having a positive effect on stress, mental health stigma, 
social isolation, social capital, autonomy, self-esteem, identity, and a 
sense of achievement [8]. Bespoke musical instruments have the 
potential to provide Disabled people with access to music making [14]. 
O’Donnell’s review shows that music making can provide many 
benefits for health and wellbeing for Disabled people. By removing 
barriers to enable full participation in music making, ADMIs can be 
an interface to social activities and access to the arts for the greater 
population.  
  The Inclusive Design methodology emerged in the mid 1990s to 
challenge misguided but deep-seated assumptions about ageing, 
disability, and social equality [5]. Inclusive design is aligned with the 
social model of disability which states that we live in a world 
increasingly shaped by human intervention where design can enable 
or disable people [4]. By acknowledging the social model of disability 
and inclusive design practice, this research seeks to create a 
collaborative process in which Disabled people are active stakeholders 
who drive the design process.  
  Speculative Design is a methodology used within many design 
practices to envision a future where one is to use design as a means of 
speculating how things could be [7]. Speculative design has shown 
great potential as critical approach to dealing with social issues [20] as 
well as generating new ideas around specific design enquires [7]. 
Within the field of HCI, speculative design is also a way for making, 
building, and understanding the nature of our emerging interactions of 
futures with technology [28]. This paper incorporates several 
speculative design methods which will be discussed within the 
workshop plan in Section 4. 
  Speculative design and AI has been used previously [22] and the 
collaboration between human-AI interactions and has brought up 
discussion on the design and social adoption of technologies [25]. 
Generative AI is a field of AI that creates new content such as images, 
text, and music based on input data or prompts [30]. It utilises machine 
learning algorithms and deep neural networks to learn patterns and 
features in a data set to produce novel and unseen data [23]. This paper 
explores workshops utilizing DALL-E 2, a generative AI program that 
generates images from text prompts [3]. 
  The ethical use of AI image-to-text generators is currently a highly 
discussed topic. Several articles which question whether text to image 
generators are taking artist’s jobs [13], replacing programmers [12] as 
well as highlighting the racial and sexist bias [25] within the resulting 
images. Whilst acknowledging the problems associated with large 
data sets and image creation, this paper seeks to focus on the use of 
these technologies to benefit the underrepresented communities within 
tech innovation and the arts [14].  The research centres on the people 
who stand to be adversely affected by the technology with a broad 
view on the possible ways that technology can benefit minority 
communities [20]. 
  Although there are several ADMIs success stories [9], their 
development can be resource intensive. This can be due to creating 
new physical prototypes along the design journey, each using new 
materials and adapting form for each individual user. Bespoke or 
modular ADMIs customised for individual users may offer more 
potential creative output. 
 
3. MOTIVATION 
This collaborative study seeks to trial new image generation 
algorithms in order to rapidly generate visual media during the 
conceptual design phase of novel ADMIs. The motivation for trailing 
this method stems from the authors direct experience designing 
ADMIs with disabled musicians in circumstances where it was not 
possible to visualise the user’s preferences within the initial design 
workshop or meeting. The initial motivation was to question if this 
technique would engage people in designing instruments and enable a 
wide range of people access to ideation which is often not accessible 
for people with disabilities [6]. 
 
4. WORKSHOPS 
Two workshops were organised with Joy of Sound  (JOS) volunteers 
and the participants were associates or regular attendees to their events. 
JOS is an inclusive arts organization who practice and promote social 
inclusion through music and creative arts in weekly year-round 
participatory music sessions and regular combined arts projects [17]. 
70% of JOS participants identify as ethnic minorities and over 30% 
are wheelchair users [21]. JOS uses a variety of accessible acoustic 
musical instruments which include some bespoke instruments co-
designed with participants and associated instrument makers [21]. The 
first author has volunteered and worked for JOS as a facilitator and 
instrument maker for several years and have a good working 
relationship with the core team and volunteers.  
 
The purpose of the pilot workshop was to primarily understand: 
• 
The participants’ preferred movements and gestures to play 
instruments 
• 
The participants’ preferred instrument designs and 
aesthetics 
• 
Which topics and preferences do participants want in their 
designs  
• 
The utility of DALL-E 2 in ideation design processes 
• 
Identifying actions to advance inclusive participatory 
techniques and gather expert input from various 
communities. 
4.1 Workshop Overview 
The initial pilot study (Workshop 1) was conducted at a residential care 
home located in London. Participants were invited to take part in the 
workshop via a poster which advertised in the care home. The 
participants included six individuals, four of whom were male and two 
were female, with multiple learning difficulties and residing full-time 
at the care home. During the study, the participants were accompanied 
by five care and support workers, including three female and two male 
adults who do not identify as disabled. The workshop used a large 
LED monitor to clearly display the images and workshop materials. 
DALL-E 2 was displayed on the monitor so that all the participants 
could see the process of image creation.  
The second workshop (Workshop 2) was run before a regular JOS 
workshop in London and it was organised directly with participants 
and their families. The participants included three individuals, all of 
whom were male and learning difficulties who regularly attend JOS 
workshops. One participant (participant 2) was non-verbal and 
communicated through the iPad app ‘Proloquo2GO AAC’. Both 
workshops were guided by the same workshop plan and followed the 
same methods. 
 
4.2 Workshop Description 
The workshop began by using speculative design techniques to 
introduce a playful environment and draw the participants’ attention to 
an imaginary future [7]. The focus was on a factional machine called 
"Noma" that can create any musical instrument from any material, 
with customizable playing methods. The goal was to inspire 
participants to think creatively, unconstrained by practical and 
technical limitations.  
  Workshop participants were shown example instruments which 
were made by “Noma”, and which were discussed by the group. 
Participants were invited to discuss what the instruments looked like, 
what they resembled and how they might be played. The prompt 
words which were used to create the images were then revealed to the 
group to give an understanding to the participants of how the system 
worked. An example of this is shown in Figure 1. 
 
 
Figure 1 – Workshop introductory image  
 
Workshop participants were then invited to make their own 
instruments one by one. The workshop gave the opportunity for every 
participant to design a new instrument and the workshop facilitators 
incorporated any answer that was given. The aim was to create an 
inclusive and accepting space with no ‘wrong’ answers and 
participants were invited to contribute any suggestions into the design 
of their instruments.  
  The workshops provided an opportunity for participants to design 
visual representations of personalised instruments for their own use. 
The facilitators encouraged attendees to contribute based on their own 
interests and lead the direction of the instrument's style. Examples of 
questions asked by the facilitators included:  
• "If you could have an instrument that looks like anything, what 
would you like it to look like?" 
• "What size would it be?" 
• "Which colour would it be?" 
• "What would it sound like?" 
•  "Can you show me which gesture or movement you would use to 
play the instrument?" 
                      
The workshop leader facilitated the process with participants, who had 
widely varying contributions. The process of instrument creation 
varied based on the interests and access requirements of the individual. 
Through the workshops, it became evident that  DALL-E 2 can be a 
useful tool in quickly interpreting and visualising people's ideas, 
encouraging imagination, and fostering open contributions in a 
collaborative space as discussed in detail in Section 6.  
4.3 Workshop Outcomes 
The primary goal of the workshop was for every participant to design 
a visual prototype of their own instrument. The final images of the 
participant’s instruments are included in Figure 2. The image prompts 
developed by the participants to create these images were: 
• 
“a big blue instrument that look like a wolve from thriller” 
• 
“a pink musical instrument with a microphone that looks 
like a violin” 
• 
“a red musical instrument that is made from chicken 
nuggets that you play with your elbows” 
• 
“a big blue musical instrument made from forks and 
footballs MK Dons” 
• 
“a big light blue anything that makes a dit dit dit sound ” 
• 
“a kangaroo musical instrument in cartoon style” 
• 
“a icicle xylophone ” 
• 
“a eye of the tiger instrument ” 
• 
“a yellow musical instrument made from snooker balls in 
the shape of a newton cradle” 
• 
“a triangle shaped white guitar that you play with your 
hands ” 
• 
“a musical instrument made from park clothes and holes” 
 
5. INITIAL FINDINGS 
 The findings of this workshop are preliminary, and a comprehensive 
thematic analysis will be conducted on the data collected at a later date.  
 
 Preliminary Findings: 
• 
Personal preferences and hobbies were significant factors 
in the design of the instruments as revealed in workshop 
transcripts. 
• 
The most common topic was preference for specific 
colours, with 7 out of 11 instruments stating a colour 
preference. 
• 
The names of pre-existing instrument designs were the 
basis for some instruments, yet the participants wanted to 
re-design or adapt these pre-existing instruments to fit their 
personal preferences. 
Several participants expressed a desire to see their instruments 
generated in the workshop brought to real life. This is demonstrated in 
a conversation between facilitator (F1) and participant (2) below.  
F1: “Are you happy with the instruments that you made today?” 
P2: “Happy, yeah” 
F1: “Would you like it if the instrument was brought to real life?” 
P2: “Real life, yeah” 
F1: “Is there anything that you don’t like about the instruments 
you made today?” 
P2: “I don’t like playing guitar or drums, I don’t like it” 
F1: “Would you prefer to play this?” *points to their instrument* 
P2: “Yes”  
F1: “Why?” 
P2: “Cos I like it.” 
This conversation states that the participant likes the instrument that 
they created, and it suggests that it provides something different to pre-
existing instruments like a guitar or drums. On the other hand, other 
participants wanted their instruments to resemble pre-existing 
instruments which is demonstrated in a conversation with another 
participant:  
F1 – “…what do you want your instrument to be made from?” 
P7: – “What shape is the guitar? Is it a triangle?” 
Figure 2 - A collection of instruments co-designed by Joy 
of Sound participants and volunteers 
F1 – “Do you want it to be triangle shape?” 
P7: – “yeah!”  
This shows that participant (7) wanted to use a pre-existing instrument 
design as the basis for their instrument but clearly stated that the shape 
is an important factor for their instrument design.  
 
6. DICUSSION 
The initial findings of this study could be of value to other 
designers and researchers in the field. There were several 
instances during the workshops where the participants directed 
the design inquiry, as evident in the example above. This 
approach has the potential to democratise the design process by 
allowing for wider participation in the creative aspects of 
instrument design. This is in line with the literature on inclusive 
speculative design, as discussed earlier by Larsen [22], which 
highlights the challenges of designing for inclusiveness. The 
interaction between the facilitator and the participant was 
flexible and adaptive, allowing the instrument to accurately 
reflect the participant's intent whilst developing relationships 
between the facilitator and participants. This approach allowed 
for a co-creative design process, where the participant was at the 
forefront of shaping the outcome whilst in collaboration with the 
facilitator.  
   
This approach also helps designers and participants to 
share a common understanding of their ideas in a short time 
frame, ensuring that the direction of travel aligns with the 
expectations of both stakeholders. This is a key benefit of the 
technology as it presents an adaptable outcome which can be 
edited and discussed [28]. The resulting images can be used in 
prototyping new instruments and the participant’s ideas can be 
clearly reflected in the next stages of the bespoke design 
processes.  
There are also benefits for the organisations in this workshop 
method as it provides a low cost and quick way to develop ideas 
with participants with minimal workshop materials. Large LED 
screens were available on site to use for both workshops 
described in this paper and the facilitator had to provide a laptop 
alongside the workshop plan. This results in a very adaptable and 
affordable workshop which can be run in a variety of venues and 
has multiple benefits for participants, facilitators and the 
organisations involved.  
   
However, there are also limitations to this technique that 
must be considered. The findings suggest that several of the 
participants would like a physical prototype of their instrument 
designs and the gap between speculation and the actual design 
outcomes could be substantial. Additionally, the expectations of 
designers and participants could be higher than what can be 
produced in an allotted time frame. This will be tested within 
future iterations of the workshops and the feasibility of the 
designs will discussed and edited with participants alongside the 
speculative methods.  
   
Finally, we must consider the ethical implications of 
using AI-generated images in the design process, including 
issues of bias [25]. As such, it is important to carefully consider 
the limitations and ethical implications of this technique. 
 
7. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  
Our thanks to all the workshop participants for all their contributions 
and guidance in the process and to the Joy of Sound volunteers for their 
 help in the organising and co-facilitating of the workshops.  
8. FUTURE WORK 
A subsequent study will be conducted to materialise the 
prototypes generated from the images produced in the workshop 
methods. This will provide a physical representation of the 
designs, enabling a more comprehensive evaluation of the 
viability and functionality of the proposed designs. The physical 
prototypes will serve as tangible representations of the results 
and provide valuable insights into the potential applications of 
 the design concepts. 
9. CONCLUSION  
This paper has explored how AI text-to-image generation can be 
a useful tool for generating ideas within group design 
workshops. DALLE-2 was a useful tool due to several attributes 
including the low entry point, the speed of the image generation 
and adaptability of the technology.  
  The workshop demonstrated that AI image generation can be 
a good starting point for co-design workshops to generate 
conversations around instrument design, promote movement 
activities and develop relationships between designer and co-
designer.  
Charity 
The workshop also the charity to offer a new activity to their 
participants,    
Despite the absence of physical objects, participants 
mimicked the way they would play their instruments, indicating 
which part of their bodies they would use and the range of 
movement required to play an instrument. The data collected 
about participants' range of movement can be a crucial attribute 
for designing ADMIs and learning about participants' hobbies 
and desires fostered open contributions in a collaborative space. 
DALLE-2 can be a powerful tool for ideation in the early stages 
of design, offering many benefits for instrument designers to 
gain an understanding of their users.  The project has explored 
ideation with disabled participants and it is crucial that the first 
steps will go on to be refined, developed, and contextualised into 
more formal design prototypes. 
 
10. ETHICAL STANDARDS 
Full ethical approval was received from University of the West 
of England Research Ethics Committee on the 05/01/2023 for 
the duration of this project. 
Ethics Review Application Form: FET-2122-92. 
11. REFERENCES 
 
[1] S. Bødker, and K. Grønbæk. 1991. Cooperative prototyping: 
Users and designers in mutual activity. International Journal of 
Man-Machine Studies 34, 3 (1991), 453–478.  
[2] S. Bødker. Computer applications as mediators of design and 
use. DAIMI Report Series 28, 542, 1999. 
[3] Cho, J., Lu, J., Schwen, D., Hajishirzi, H., Kembhavi, A. 
(2020). “X-LXMERT: Paint, caption, and answer questions 
with multi-modal transformers”. EMNLP, 2020. 
[4] L. Cynthia Bennett, K. Shinohara, B. Blaser, A. Davidson, and 
K. Steele. Using a design workshop to explore accessible 
ideation. Proceedings of the 18th International ACM 
SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility, 
2016.  
[5] P. John Clarkson and R. Coleman. 2015. History of inclusive 
design in the UK. Applied Ergonomics 46 (2015), 235–247. 
2015. 
[6] P. John Clarkson, R. Coleman, S. Keates, and C. Lebbon. 
Inclusive design design for the whole population, London: 
Springer London. 2003  
[7] A. Dunne, and F. Raby. Speculative everything design, fiction, 
and Social Dreaming, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press. 
2014 
[8] S. O’Donnell, M. Lohan, J. Oliffe, D. Grant, and K. Galway. 
The acceptability, effectiveness and gender responsiveness of 
participatory arts interventions in promoting mental health and 
wellbeing: A systematic review. Arts & Health 14, 2 (2021), 
186–203. 2014 
[9] E. Frid. Accessible digital musical instruments—a review 
of musical interfaces in inclusive music practice. 
Multimodal Technologies and Interaction 4, 3 (2020), 34.  
[10] E. Frid, and A. Ilsar. Reimagining (Accessible) Digital 
Musical Instruments: A Survey on Electronic Music-
Making Tools. NIME 2021, 2021. 
[11] M. Gooding. 2022. Deepmind's alphacode: Is ai ready to 
replace programmers? (February 2022). Retrieved 
January 30, 2023 from 
https://techmonitor.ai/technology/ai-and-
automation/deepmind-alphacode-ai-software-developer  
[12] K. Graham-Knight and G. Tzanetakis. Adaptive Music 
Technology using the Kinect. Proceedings of the 8th ACM 
International Conference on PErvasive Technologies 
Related to Assistive Environments (2015).  
[13] J. Hawksworth. 2018. Is artificial intelligence really 
replacing jobs? here's the truth. (2018). Retrieved January 
30, 2023 from 
https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2018/09/is-artificial-
intelligence-replacing-jobs-truth/ 
[14] J. Hammel, S. Magasi, A. Heinemann, G. Whiteneck, J. 
Bogner, and E. Rodriguez. (2008). What does participation 
mean? An insider perspective from people with 
disabilities. Disability and Rehabilitation, 30(19), 1445–
1460. 
[15] S. Jang, and K. Nam, K.-Y. (2022). Utilization of 
speculative design for designing human-ai interactions. 
Archives of Design Research, 35(2), 57–71.  
[16] Q. Jarvis-Holland, C. Cortez, N. Gamill, and F. Botello. 
Expanding access to music technology -- Rapid 
prototyping accessible instrument solutions for musicians 
with intellectual disabilities. Proceedings of the 
International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical 
Expression, (NIME 2020) (Online, 28 June - 1 July 2022, 
2020) 
[17] Joy of Sound. (2022). About JOS, Joy of Sound. Retrieved 
January 30, 2023 from https://Joyofsound.org/ 
[18] A. Lucas, M. Ortiz, and F. Schroeder. (2020). The 
longevity of bespoke, accessible music technology: A case 
for community. Proceedings of the International 
Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 
(NIME 2020) (21-25 July, 2020) 243-248. 
[19] [6] Longden, W. E. (2019). Inclusive participatory design 
of bespoke music instruments and auxiliary access 
equipment, as emancipatory arts interventions advocating 
for equality and wellbeing. Doctoral thesis, London 
Metropolitan University. 
[20] B. Marenko. FutureCrafting: A Speculative Method for an 
Imaginative AI. In AAAI Spring Symposium Series, 2018.  
[21] A. Karpathy. 2020. Generative models. (September 2020). 
Retrieved January 30, 2023 from 
https://openai.com/blog/generative-models/  
[22] H. S. Larsen, and P. Hedvall, 2012. Ideation and ability. 
Proceedings of the 12th Participatory Design Conference: 
Exploratory Papers, Workshop Descriptions, Industry 
Cases - Volume 2 (2012). 2012. 
[23] Z. Lin, B. Villari, and B. Sevaldson. Towards speculative 
services for an inclusive society: Understanding the 
relationships between systemic-, service- and Speculative 
Design. 2022. 
[24] M. Steen. 2013. Co-Design as a process of joint inquiry 
and Imagination. Design Issues 29, 2 (2013), 16–28. 2013. 
[25] N. Tilmes. Disability, fairness, and algorithmic bias in AI 
recruitment. Ethics and Information Technology 24, 2 
(2022). 2022. 
[26] OpenAI. 2022. Dall·E: Creating images from text. (June 
2022). Retrieved January 30, 2023 from 
https://openai.com/blog/dall-e/ 
[27] S. Nouri. 2022. Council post: The role of bias in Artificial 
Intelligence. (November 2022). Retrieved January 30, 
2023 from 
https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbestechcouncil/2021/02/0
4/the-role-of-bias-in-artificial-
intelligence/?sh=555891d579d8 
[28] M. Sturdee, and J. Lindley. Sketching & Drawing as 
Future Inquiry in HCI. In HTTF ’19: ACM Symposium, 
(Nottingham, UK November 19–20, 2018) ACM, New 
York, NY, USA, 2018. 
[29] A.Ward, L. Woodbury, and T. Davis. Design 
Considerations for Instruments for Users with Complex 
Needs in SEN Settings. 2017. 
[30] J. Xu, H. Li, and S. Zhou. An overview of deep generative 
models. IETE Technical Review 32, 2 (2014), 131–139. 
2014.
 
