Sparking Creativity with Robots:
A Design Perspective
Patr´ıcia Alves-Oliveira
Dept. of Psychology
ISCTE-IUL - CIS-IUL - INESC-ID
Lisbon, Portugal
patricia alves olivera@iscte-iul.pt
Silvia Tulli
Dept. of Computer Science
Instituto Superior T´ecnico - INESC-ID
Lisbon, Portugal
silvia.tulli@gaips.inesc-id.pt
Philipp Wilken
Dept. of Business Informatics
University Duisburg-Essen
Duisburg-Essen, Germany
philipp.wilken@stud.uni-due.de
Ramona Merhej
Dept. of Computer Science
Instituto Superior T´ecnico - INESC-ID
Lisbon, Portugal
ramona.merhej@gaips.inesc-id.pt
Jo˜ao Gandum
Dept. of Computer Science
Instituto Superior T´ecnico
Lisbon, Portugal
joao.gandum@tecnico.ulisboa.pt
Ana Paiva
Dept. of Computer Science
Instituto Superior T´ecnico - INESC-ID
Lisbon, Portugal
ana.paiva@inesc-id.pt
Abstract—We present the design and evaluation process of a
robot aimed at stimulating creativity in humans in a drawing-
oriented collaborative drawing task. Collaboration towards a
common goal is known to be one of the most inﬂuential factors
for creativity nourishing. The social robot acted as a collaborative
peer in a drawing activity, taking turns with the human, to
complete their drawing. In each turn, both “artists” (the robot
and the human) draw something new until they achieved their
ﬁnal drawing. The goal was to study if a robot, in comparison
with a tablet, can stimulate creativity. A total of 28 participants
were distributed across robot and tablet conditions. Creativity
scores for each drawing were calculated. Contrary to what was
expected, creativity score did not present statistically signiﬁcant
main effect across conditions. We discuss our results under a
design perspective, addressing the role of the robot’s embodiment
and presence, as well as the purpose of use for robots in society
and what implications there is for design.
Index Terms—Social robots, co-creativity, critical design, spec-
ulative design, embodiment
I. INTRODUCTION
Creativity is one of the most sought-after skills with major
implications for well-being and personal life, and it is related
to career professional success in career [1]–[3]. The role of
creativity in society has been highlighted and valued [4]. As
a consequence, developed societies have put emphasis on the
value of innovation, collaboration, and creative problem solv-
ing, over standardized knowledge [5]. Therefore, the economy
of developed societies is shifting from an industrial economy,
that valued manufacturing work and standard memorization of
procedures, towards a creative economy, valuing creativity at
work [6]–[8]. Knowing this, it becomes imperative to study
and develop ways to spark creativity, specially using new
technologies, such as social robots.
Scholars have been debating about how to harnesses the
creative potential. On the one hand, changes in the tradi-
tional school system have been suggested, namely concerning
curriculum content, teaching approaches, and education for
empowerment [9]. Other developments have been made target-
ing adults and the workplace, speciﬁcally by studying which
work environment characteristics stimulate creativity [10], how
communication and the quality of the relationship affects
creativity [11], and other additional conditions related with
creativity nourishing, such as independence and the nature
of the task itself [12]. From these variables that inﬂuence
creativity development, collaboration (or teamwork), deﬁned
by a group of people working together towards a common
goal by interacting with each other, is known to be one of the
most inﬂuential factors [13].
In this work, we designed and developed a collaborative
activity between a social robot and a human participant
to understand the effects of human-robot interaction (HRI)
on creativity outcomes. The team was constituted by one
humanoid robot and one adult participant that engaged in
an open-ended collaborative drawing task. This meant that
the “artists” (study participants and the robot) could draw
anything. The resulting product, i.e., their ﬁnal drawing, was
evaluated in terms of creativity scores. We compared the
results with a control condition constituted by a tablet to
investigate the effects of the robot’s embodiment and presence
on creativity.
II. RELATED WORK
A. Deﬁning Creativity
Creativity is considered one of the highest human cognitive
abilities [22]. It is a multi-faced concept with over 60 dif-
ferent deﬁnitions in the ﬁeld of psychology alone [23], [24].
While earliest deﬁnitions of creativity described this ability
as a function of an individual [14], creativity deﬁnition has
evolved and is now deﬁned as an interaction between aptitude,
environment, and process by which an individual or a group
produces a tangible product that is both novel and useful,
within the social context [25]. More deﬁnitions are present in
TABLE I
SUMMARY OF SELECTED DEFINITIONS OF CREATIVITY IN TIMELINE ORDER.
Author(s)
Creativity deﬁnition
Guilford,
1967
[14]
Creativity is deﬁned as the embodiment of thought in the form of external behavior, consisting of three characteristics: ﬂuency,
ﬂexibility, and originality.
Torrance,
1998
[15]
Creativity is viewed as a series of ﬂows, including problem identiﬁcation, speculation, construction of hypothetical assumptions
and creation, and the sharing of ideas with others.
Amabile,
1996
[16]
Creativity is regarded as the interaction between the individual and its external environment, including three components: domain-
relevant skills, creativity-relevant skills creative-thinking skills, and task motivation.
Sternberg
and
Lubart,
1996
[17]
Creativity is perceived as an ability that everyone has, though with varying levels that are affected by the combination of six types
of different and interrelated elements: intellectual abilities, knowledge, thinking styles, personality, motivation, and environmental
elements.
Boden, 2004 [18]
Creativity is composed of Psychological and Historical creativity: P-creativity involves coming up with a surprising, valuable idea
thats new to the person who invented it; an idea is H-creative if no one else has had it before and it has arisen for the ﬁrst time
in human history.
Baer and Kauf-
man, 2005 [19]
Creativity is explained through the lenses of the Amusement Park Theory that states intelligence, motivation, and a suitable
environment, are necessary pre-requisites of creativity.
Sawyer,
2017
[20]
Creativity is understood in the context of a group emergence where ﬂow, collaboration, and improvisation processes take place.
When group synchrony is reached, it becomes difﬁcult to discriminate the individual contribution of each person, as “the whole is
greater than the individual parts”.
Cronin
and
Loewenstein,
2018 [21]
Creativity is a process of following cues to generate insights that change our perspectives, which with the craft we can use to form
inventions and enlightenment.
the literature, and an overview of selected creativity deﬁnitions
can be found in Table I.
Creativity is also composed of different domains, namely
ﬁgural and verbal. While ﬁgural creativity involves creative
thinking in visual arts (e.g., drawing, painting, sculpting),
verbal creativity relates with communication of ideas and
thoughts (e.g., poetry, discourse, and communication) [26].
Creativity is also characterized in terms of the “four P’s of
creativity”, that represent essential cornerstones for creativ-
ity research. These four P’s are the Person (covers infor-
mation about personality, intellect, temperament, physique,
traits, habits, attitudes, self-concept, value systems, defense
mechanisms, and behaviour), Process (relates to motivation,
perception, learning, thinking, and communication), Product
(when an idea becomes embodied into tangible form), and
Press (or environment, and refers to the relationship between
human beings and their environment) [27]. In light of these di-
mensions, different tests and interventions for creative thinking
were developed (see a literature review on [28]). For additional
material on creativity assessment, see [29]–[32].
Given that the nature of our task consists in a drawing
activity, our work focuses on ﬁgural creativity. The ﬁnal
drawing is evaluated in terms of creativity, which means we
have focused on the study of the creative product, since a
creativity score is computed for the ﬁnal drawing.
B. Collaborative Technology for Creativity
Technology appears as promising in the ﬁeld of creativity
[33]. Lubart (2005), envisions computers promoting creativity
in different ways and has deﬁned fours possible future roles
for computers in the ﬁeld of creativity [34]:
• Computer as nanny – computers encourage creativity
by monitoring the working process and supporting the
potentially creative person according to the progress
made.
• Computer as pen-pal – computers facilitate the ex-
change of creative ideas between diverse people by inte-
grating and represent them on a physical space.
• Computer as coach – computers can support the creative
process by providing information in different ways that
people can come up with creative ideas, serving as
analogs to jump-start the creative process.
• Computer as colleague – computers work in a real
partnership in the creative process with humans, and
this is the most ambitious vision of humancomputer
interaction.
Computers have already been used to serve as a tool to
help game designers to co-design new levels for their games,
acting as a colleague, showing a positive inﬂuence for the
creative level design process [35]. Additionally, when children
create a story with autonomous virtual agents in a tablet app,
their creative idea generation process is richer with more
ﬂuency of ideas, demonstrating that the autonomous behavior
of technology can spark creativity in a storytelling task [36].
Other interesting projects with virtual environments have been
developed to demonstrate technological creativity, e.g., [37].
Robots have also joined technologies for creativity promo-
tion. A social robot was used to encourage participants to
generate creative ideas for their Zen Rock Garden. The results
showed that participants engaged in the creativity task for
longer periods of time and provided almost twice the number
of creative expressions in the robot condition compared to the
PowerPoint condition [38]. A different study used a social
robot to stimulate curiosity, an essential creative trait, in
children. Children’s curiosity levels were higher after inter-
acting with the curious and social robot, denoting the impact
Fig. 1. Experimental study conditions: on the right: participant drawing with
a robot; on the left: participant drawing with a tablet.
o robots in humans’ creative behavior [39]. Additionally, a
robot is being used to stimulate creativity in children during
a storytelling task. This robot aims to act as a character in
children’s stories providing additional ideas for their story plot.
Preliminary results were promising in relation with creativity
stimulation [40]–[42].
III. EXPERIMENTAL STUDY:
ROBOTS FOR CREATIVITY SPARK
This work is a design proposal that envisions social robots
as drivers for human creativity. To test the hypothesis that
robots can play a role in stimulating human creativity, we
created a scenario in which a human participant and a robot
collaboratively draw something together. This was compared
to another study condition in which a participant draw collab-
oratively with a tablet. For a visual representation of the study
conditions, see Figure 1. The drawing task has a collaborative
nature because the robot and the human take turns during the
drawing process. Additionally, the drawing was open-ended,
which means that no speciﬁc instruction for a drawing was
provided and the task only ﬁnishes when the human participant
is satisﬁed with their drawing. The goal was to test if the
embodiment and the presence of a robot can stimulate human
creativity. It is established in the HRI literature that the mere
physical presence of a social robot inﬂuences the interaction
with the human counterpart [43]–[45], making our research
question the following: can the embodiment and the presence
of social robot lead to human creativity during a collaborative
drawing task? Furthermore, our study hypothesis is that during
a collaborative drawing between a human participant and
a social robot, ﬁgural creativity levels on the human will
increase, compared to drawing with a tablet.
A. Participants
A total of 28 participants were involved in this study, being
randomly distributed across two study conditions (robot or
tablet conditions). Participants in the tablet condition were
22-30 years old (M = 24.25, SD = 2.33), 57.1% male, and
57.1% had interacted with a robots before; participants in
the robot condition were 19-33 years old (M = 24.35, SD =
4.49), 71.4% male, and 64.3% had interacted a robots before.
Participants were recruited from the Technical University of
Lisbon in Portugal, constituting a student academic population.
Their participation was voluntary, and each participant signed
Fig. 2.
Examples of ﬁnal drawings: on the right: drawing made my a
participant and a robot. The green aspects of the drawing were the elements
drawn by the robot; on the left: drawing made by a participant and the tablet.
The red strokes are the elements drawn by the tablet.
a consent form prior to the starting of the study and assented
to participate.
B. Creativity Measure
We used the Test for Creative Thinking-Drawing Production
(TCT-DP) test to measure the ﬁgural creativity of the human
participants. TCT-DP is a well established test in the ﬁeld
of creativity, applicable to persons of a broad age range, is
culture-fair, and helps identifying high creative potentials as
well as low creative, neglected, and poorly developed ones
[46]–[48]. A version of the test adapted to the Portuguese
population was used [49].
TCT-DP consists of a sheet of paper with six graphic
elements of a circle, a dot, a dashed line, a 90-degree angle, a
curved line, and a small open square, placed at ﬁxed and pre-
established locations on the page. All of the elements, except
for the small open square, are enclosed in a large rectangular
frame, and this forms a short of an incomplete drawing. In its
traditional form, participants are instructed to “complete the
drawing initiated by an artist” and must produce a drawing
using these elements. In the case of our study, we changed
the instruction and participants were told to “draw something
together with the robot”, since the this was a collaborative
drawing task. In our case, the robot (or the tablet) would draw
the already six graphic elements predeﬁned by the creative test
and participants would complete the drawing. This ensured
that the drawings made by the robot or the tablet across
all study sessions were the same, thus, controlling for the
creativity stimuli. For an example of how the drawings looked
like, see Figure 2. In our study, instead of a sheet of paper used
in the traditional application of the TCT-DP, we used a tablet
for the drawing task. We opted for this method because the
NAO robot (https://www.softbankrobotics.com/emea/en/nao)
used for our study lacks dexterity to write. Therefore, a tablet
was used to simulate the robot’s drawing ability.
The ﬁnal drawing made by the participants and the robot
was scored according to the 14-point scoring system using
in general an ordinal measurement scale, proposed by Urban
(2005) [47]. A trained psychologist that underwent TCT-DP
training scored each drawing. The criteria used to code the
drawings are the following:
1) Continuations (Cn) – number of graphic elements used
among the initial elements proposed.
2) Completions (Cm) – number of graphic elements used
in a meaningful way.
3) New Elements (Ne) – number of new items added to the
composition.
4) Connections with lines (Cl) – number of contacts
established between the initial graphic elements.
5) Connections made that contribute to a theme (Cth)
– degree to which the elements were connected themati-
cally.
6) Boundary-breaking being fragment-dependent (Bdf)
– use of the element outside the frame.
7) Boundary-breaking being fragment-independent (Bﬁ)
– use of added elements outside the frame.
8) Perspective (Pe) – use of three-dimensional drawing
techniques.
9) Humor, affectivity/emotionality/expressive power of
the drawing (Hu) – creation of a humorist or emotional
atmosphere.
10) Unconventionality B (Uca) – Unconventional manipula-
tion of the paper. Because we used a tablet for participants
to draw that had a ﬁxed location on the table to enable
the robot to simulate its drawing, we have excluded this
score from our study.
11) Unconventionality B (Ucb) – use of abstract, surrealistic,
ﬁctional and/or symbolic themes.
12) Unconventionality C (Ucc) – use of words, numbers,
and/or cartoon-like elements.
13) Unconventionality C (Ucd) – non-stereotypical utiliza-
tion of fragments of ﬁgures.
14) Speed (Sp) – Time for completion of the drawing. Since
we did not limited the time that participants could draw
with the robot to avoid imposing many restrictions on this
task, we have excluded this score from our study.
C. Procedure
Before starting the experiment, participants were asked
to read and sign a consent form. After that, the drawing
task began and the participant sat in front of the tablet
while listening the instructions that the researchers provided,
being free to ask any clariﬁcation question. The instruction
provided to the participants was that they would be “drawing
with the robot (or the tablet) something they wished.” When
everything was clear, the wizard-of-oz (WoZ) started. Both the
robot/tablet and the participant had two turns to contribute to
the drawing. When the 4 turns were ﬁnished, the participant
would signal the researchers that the drawing was complete
and the experiment ﬁnished.
D. Results
We analyzed the impact of the robot on the human cre-
ativity, by using the non-parametric Mann-Whitney U Test
given that our sample followed a non-normal distribution.
The between-subject factor was the embodiment (robot or
tablet) and the within-subject factor was the score computer
for ﬁgural creativity. There was no signiﬁcant main effect of
creativity nor a signiﬁcant interaction between the embodi-
ment and creativity, U = 91.000, p = 0.400. Additionally,
we explored two additional dimensions of the TCT-DP in-
troduced by Nogueira (2017), namely conventional and the
non-conventional thinking [50]. The reliability of the items
for the non-conventional thinking was poor, p = 0.475, and
questionable for the conventional thinking p = 0.688. The
Mann-Whitney U Test did not reveal statistically signiﬁcant
results in conventional and non conventional thinking, p >.5.
IV. DISCUSSION
Creativity is of paramount importance in our current society.
With this work, we provided a speculative design study
that aims to explore co-creativity tasks between humans and
robots. Having robots performing or supporting the creative
human process is a way to explore the design of robots for
social good. Indeed, creativity is an ability that is desired in
developed societies, and that has the potential to be stimulated
if trained [28], [51]–[54]. Despite our experiment being one
of the ﬁrst to explore creativity in the ﬁeld of HRI, we were
not able to support our study hypothesis, as no signiﬁcant
improvement in creativity was found when drawing with the
robot. Despite of the desire to include interactive technologies
in roles that stimulate and foster human abilities, such as of
being creative, doing so is not a trivial task. In the case of our
work, designing an experiment with a collaborative drawing
scenario proposed challenges that need to be addressed in the
design perspective. Particularly, the choice of the task can
lead to user frustration (e.g., some said the robot “ruined their
drawing”), or have higher expectations over robots’ abilities
(e.g., some participants had higher expectation of the drawing
ability of the robot).
The discussion about creativity allow us to reﬂect on edu-
cation and on what is taught and how. In this perspective, this
project is critical to reﬂect on traditional learning strategies,
the roles in education, and the content being delivered. As we
have highlighted in the related work, creativity is not the mere
result of learning information, but the use of such information
to produce something that can combine previous knowledge
to accomplishment something else – from solving problems of
different nature, to come up with innovative ideas. Due to this,
it is interesting to explore the potential opportunities offered
in the exchange and collaboration with robotic partners, which
can be an incentive and a guide for the creative process,
making it more stimulating and effective. Consequentially,
areas of application for exploring scenarios of co-creation
with robots can be framed within the notion of robots for
social good. In this regard, more investigation should be made
using different methodologies for analyzing the process of co-
creation with robots, namely behavioral analysis of the creative
process that can yield exclusive results that are not implicated
in the ﬁnal creative product. Also, variables related with the
person, such as the their levels of curiosity and acceptance of
robots, should be controlled.
The appearance that a robot should have is another interest-
ing reﬂection for the design of systems that aims of stimulating
creativity, by exploring the role of humanoid robots in contrast
to minimalist appearance of robots 1. Additionally, we should
consider diversiﬁed contexts, such as school, workplaces and
other collaborative settings, as well as long-term multi-party
interactions, to explore this topic and learn more about the
effective application and use of robots for social good.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by national funds through Fundac¸˜ao
para
a
Ciˆencia
e
a
Tecnologia
(FCT)
with
reference
UID/CEC/50021/2019 and by the European Union’s Horizon
2020 research and innovation program under grant agreement
No 765955 ANIMATAS project. P. Alves-Oliveira acknowl-
edges a FCT PhD grant ref. SFRH/BD/110223/2015. We thank
all the participants of this study for their involvement.
REFERENCES
[1] H. Gardner and E. Gardner, Art, mind, and brain: A cognitive approach
to creativity.
Basic Books, 2008.
[2] K. Robinson, Out of our minds: Learning to be creative.
John Wiley
& Sons, 2011.
[3] P. Collard and J. Looney, “Nurturing creativity in education,” European
Journal of Education, vol. 49, no. 3, pp. 348–364, 2014.
[4] S. Moran, “The roles of creativity in society,” The Cambridge handbook
of creativity, pp. 74–90, 2010.
[5] I. N. Dubina, E. G. Carayannis, and D. F. Campbell, “Creativity econ-
omy and a crisis of the economy? coevolution of knowledge, innovation,
and creativity, and of the knowledge economy and knowledge society,”
Journal of the Knowledge Economy, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 1–24, 2012.
[6] D. H. Pink, A whole new mind: Why right-brainers will rule the future.
Penguin, 2006.
[7] C. Mellander and R. Florida, “The creative class goes global,” in The
Creative Class Goes Global.
Routledge, 2013, pp. 23–30.
[8] C. A. Burnett and K. P. Haydon, “Do we need a revolutionary approach
to bring creativity into education?” in Creative Contradictions in Edu-
cation.
Springer, 2017, pp. 201–220.
[9] T. Davies, “Creative teaching and learning in europe: Promoting a new
paradigm,” The Curriculum Journal, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 37–57, 2006.
[10]
¨O. C¸ okpekin and M. P. Knudsen, “Does organizing for creativity really
lead to innovation?” Creativity and Innovation Management, vol. 21,
no. 3, pp. 304–314, 2012.
[11] J. Kratzer, O. T. A. Leenders, and J. M. v. Engelen, “Stimulating
the potential: Creative performance and communication in innovation
teams,” Creativity and Innovation Management, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 63–
71, 2004.
[12] G. R. Oldham, “Stimulating and supporting creativity in organizations,”
Managing knowledge for sustained competitive advantage, pp. 243–273,
2003.
[13] J. Dul and C. Ceylan, “Work environments for employee creativity,”
Ergonomics, vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 12–20, 2011.
[14] J. P. Guilford, “The nature of human intelligence.” 1967.
[15] E. P. Torrance, “The nature of creativity as manifest in its testing,” The
nature of creativity: Contemporary psychological perspectives, vol. 43,
1988.
[16] T. M. Amabile, Creativity in context: Update to the social psychology
of creativity.
Hachette UK, 1996.
[17] R. J. Sternberg and T. I. Lubart, “Investing in creativity.” American
psychologist, vol. 51, no. 7, p. 677, 1996.
[18] M. A. Boden, The creative mind: Myths and mechanisms.
Routledge,
2004.
[19] J. Baer and J. C. Kaufman, “Bridging generality and speciﬁcity: The
amusement park theoretical (apt) model of creativity,” Roeper review,
vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 158–163, 2005.
1See the work of Sougwen Chung on the use of non-humanoid robots for
painting exhibitions: http://sougwen.com/
[20] K. Sawyer, Group genius: The creative power of collaboration.
Basic
Books, 2017.
[21] M. A. Cronin and J. Loewenstein, The Craft of Creativity.
Stanford
University Press, 2018.
[22] L. W. Anderson, D. R. Krathwohl, P. W. Airasian, K. A. Cruikshank,
R. E. Mayer, P. R. Pintrich, J. Raths, and M. C. Wittrock, “A taxonomy
for learning, teaching, and assessing: A revision of blooms taxonomy of
educational objectives, abridged edition,” White Plains, NY: Longman,
2001.
[23] C. W. Taylor, “Various approaches to and deﬁnitions of creativity,” The
nature of creativity, pp. 99–121, 1988.
[24] R. E. Mayer, “22 ﬁfty years of creativity research,” Handbook of
creativity, vol. 449, 1999.
[25] J. A. Plucker, R. A. Beghetto, and G. T. Dow, “Why isn’t creativity more
important to educational psychologists? potentials, pitfalls, and future
directions in creativity research,” Educational psychologist, vol. 39,
no. 2, pp. 83–96, 2004.
[26] J. P. Guilford, “Creative abilities in the arts.” Psychological review,
vol. 64, no. 2, p. 110, 1957.
[27] M. Rhodes, “An analysis of creativity,” The Phi Delta Kappan, vol. 42,
no. 7, pp. 305–310, 1961.
[28] G. Scott, L. E. Leritz, and M. D. Mumford, “The effectiveness of
creativity training: A quantitative review,” Creativity Research Journal,
vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 361–388, 2004.
[29] J. C. Kaufman, J. A. Plucker, and J. Baer, Essentials of creativity
assessment.
John Wiley & Sons, 2008, vol. 53.
[30] J. C. Kaufman, Creativity 101.
Springer publishing company, 2016.
[31] N. K. Park, M. Y. Chun, and J. Lee, “Revisiting individual creativity
assessment: Triangulation in subjective and objective assessment meth-
ods,” Creativity Research Journal, vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 1–10, 2016.
[32] E. P. Torrance, “Predictive validity of the torrance tests of creative
thinking,” The Journal of creative behavior, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 236–262,
1972.
[33] J. F. Pedersen, L. M. Vermeulen, C. Remy, M. M. Biskjaer, and
P. Dalsgaard, “Mapping the landscape of creativity support tools in hci,”
in The 2019 ACM CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI’19) ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems.
Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), 2019.
[34] T. Lubart, “How can computers be partners in the creative process: clas-
siﬁcation and commentary on the special issue,” International Journal
of Human-Computer Studies, vol. 63, no. 4-5, pp. 365–369, 2005.
[35] P. Lucas and C. Martinho, “Stay awhile and listen to 3buddy, a co-
creative level design support tool,” in Eighth International Conference
on Computational Creativity, ICCC, Atlanta, 2017.
[36] A. Pires, P. Alves-Oliveira, P. Arriaga, and C. Martinho, “Cubus:
Autonomous embodied characters to stimulate creative idea generation
in groups of children,” in International Conference on Intelligent Virtual
Agents.
Springer, 2017, pp. 360–373.
[37] S. Colton, “The painting fool: Stories from building an automated
painter,” in Computers and creativity.
Springer, 2012, pp. 3–38.
[38] P. H. Kahn Jr, T. Kanda, H. Ishiguro, B. T. Gill, S. Shen, J. H.
Ruckert, and H. E. Gary, “Human creativity can be facilitated through
interacting with a social robot,” in The Eleventh ACM/IEEE International
Conference on Human Robot Interaction.
IEEE Press, 2016, pp. 173–
180.
[39] G. Gordon, C. Breazeal, and S. Engel, “Can children catch curiosity from
a social robot?” in 2015 10th ACM/IEEE International Conference on
Human-Robot Interaction (HRI).
IEEE, 2015, pp. 91–98.
[40] P. Alves-Oliveira, P. Arriaga, A. Paiva, and G. Hoffman, “Yolo, a robot
for creativity: A co-design study with children,” in Proceedings of the
2017 Conference on Interaction Design and Children. ACM, 2017, pp.
423–429.
[41] P. Alves-Oliveira, A. Chandak, I. Cloutier, P. Kompella, P. Moegenburg,
and A. E. Bastos Pires, “Yolo-a robot that will make your creativity
boom,” in Companion of the 2018 ACM/IEEE International Conference
on Human-Robot Interaction.
ACM, 2018, pp. 335–336.
[42] P. Alves-Oliveira, P. Arriaga, G. Hoffman, and A. Paiva, “Boosting
children’s creativity through creative interactions with social robots,”
in 2016 11th ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot
Interaction (HRI).
IEEE, 2016, pp. 591–592.
[43] J. Li, “The beneﬁt of being physically present: A survey of experimental
works comparing copresent robots, telepresent robots and virtual agents,”
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, vol. 77, pp. 23–37,
2015.
[44] Y. Pan and A. Steed, “A comparison of avatar-, video-, and robot-
mediated interaction on users trust in expertise,” Frontiers in Robotics
and AI, vol. 3, p. 12, 2016.
[45] Z. Kasap and N. Magnenat-Thalmann, “Building long-term relationships
with virtual and robotic characters: the role of remembering,” The Visual
Computer, vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 87–97, 2012.
[46] H. G. Jellen and K. K. Urban, “The tct-dp (test for creative thinking-
drawing production): An instrument that can be applied to most age and
ability groups.” Creative Child & Adult Quarterly, 1986.
[47] K. K. Urban, “Assessing creativity: The test for creative thinking-
drawing production (tct-dp).” International Education Journal, vol. 6,
no. 2, pp. 272–280, 2005.
[48] H. G. Jellen and K. K. Urban, “Assessing creative potential world-wide:
The ﬁrst cross-cultural application of the test for creative thinkingdraw-
ing production (tct-dp),” Gifted Education International, vol. 6, no. 2,
pp. 78–86, 1989.
[49] L. Almeida and S. I. Nogueira, “Estudo preliminar do teste test for
creative thinking-drawing production (tct-dp),” Psychologica, no. 52-I,
pp. 193–210, 2010.
[50] S. I. Nogueira, L. S. Almeida, and T. S. Lima, “Two tracks of thought:
A structural model of the test for creative thinking-drawing production
(tct-dp),” Creativity Research Journal, vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 206–211, 2017.
[51] R. S. Mansﬁeld, T. V. Busse, and E. J. Krepelka, “The effectiveness of
creativity training,” Review of Educational Research, vol. 48, no. 4, pp.
517–536, 1978.
[52] L. H. Rose and H.-T. LIN, “A meta-analysis of long-term creativity
training programs,” The Journal of Creative Behavior, vol. 18, no. 1,
pp. 11–22, 1984.
[53] H.-H. Ma, “The effect size of variables associated with creativity: A
meta-analysis,” Creativity Research Journal, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 30–42,
2009.
[54] K. Birdi, “Creativity training,” in Human Resource Management, Inno-
vation and Performance.
Springer, 2016, pp. 298–312.
