A Speculative Exploration of the Role of Dialogue in Human-Computer
Co-creation
Oliver Bown
Interactive Media Lab
University of New South Wales
o.bown@unsw.edu.au
Kazjon Grace
Design Lab
University of Sydney
kazjon.grace@sydney.edu.au
Liam Bray
Interactive Media Lab
University of New South Wales
liam.bray@student.unsw.edu.au
Dan Ventura
Computer Science Department
Brigham Young University
ventura@cs.byu.edu
Abstract
In this paper we consider the notion of dialogic creative ar-
tiﬁcial intelligence (DCAI) systems, where co-creativity be-
tween a human user and a computational system is supported
through dialogic interaction. By dialogue we mean both tra-
ditional language-based communication for explicit critique
and persuasion (dialogue about creative artefacts) as well as
a broader potentially non-linguistic notion of dialogue that
emerges through the exchange of suggestions and changes
(dialogue through creative artefacts). To capture this, we de-
ﬁne DCAI as occurring when both system and user are able
to inﬂuence each others’ creative objectives. The paper mo-
tivates our pursuit of dialogic interaction and provides some
explanation of why we have deﬁned it through its impacts
rather than its mechanism of action. We provide two anal-
yses to support our argument: an exploration of a commer-
cial creativity support tool that has an extensive vocabulary
for describing artefacts abstractly but does not meet our def-
inition of dialogic interaction, and a case study of a creative
interaction between two human professionals that exhibits di-
alogic interaction throughout. For the latter we consider how
studies of human-human co-creation can offer non-obvious
design concepts that might be applied to co-creative DCAI
systems.
Introduction
The use of computational creativity algorithms to create ap-
plied usable co-creative systems is now a signiﬁcant focus
of research in the ﬁeld, requiring a combination of computer
science, design and creative practice-focused research meth-
ods.
Dialogue, both overt linguistic discussion and non-
linguistic exchange of concepts and artefacts, is a critical
component of human creative collaboration. In this paper we
explore how different ideas of ‘dialogic interaction’ might
be realised in co-creative systems, both in addition to and
instead of a more rigid graphical mode of human-computer
interaction (Shneiderman 1983). The main purpose of this
paper is to develop an understanding of the nature of dia-
logue as an interaction design concept, what design require-
ments it presents and what challenges it poses for the current
state of the art.
We do this by considering, as small case studies, one ex-
isting piece of commercial music generation software, and
one observational study of a commercial music production
team working together in a collaborative creative process
(without the use of AI tools). These small case studies are
used to examine the gap between existing modes of human-
computer interaction involving creative AI systems, and po-
tential scenarios that may more closely resemble human-to-
human co-creative activities. As such, this is viewed as spec-
ulative design research (Auger 2013), albeit without a design
artefact. We attempt to abstract the features of both types of
interaction such that we might consider a range of design
possibilities (i.e., not necessarily ﬁxating on imitating the
human-to-human scenario).
We begin by outlining some expectations of what dialogic
interaction might entail in creative contexts, laying the foun-
dation for the development of co-creative agents exhibiting
what we call dialogic creative artiﬁcial intelligence (DCAI).
We then go on to evaluate an existing piece of generative
music technology according to these expectations, consider-
ing how it falls short, but also how it comes close in some
ways, to satisfying the requirements for DCAI. Following
that, we present our observations of a real human-to-human
co-creative activity that clearly exhibits dialogic interaction.
Lastly, we piece these elements together to consider some
within-reach possibilities for supporting DCAI.
A Vision for Dialogic Creative AI
Co-creativity, in the context of computational creativity re-
search, describes a scenario in which a human and a com-
puter collaboratively make contributions to a creative out-
come. It is common to frame a vision of co-creativity with
reference to human-to-human forms of collaborative cre-
ative production, where the computer becomes promoted
from a “mere” tool to a creative partner (McCormack
2008). For example, Lubart discusses four human-to-human
metaphors that help categorise how computers might be-
come creative partners: the computer as nanny, the computer
as pen-pal, the computer as coach, and the computer as col-
league (Lubart 2005), each describing a different way that
the computer makes contributions to the output. In some
cases, the computer’s output could clearly be called cre-
ative in its own right with its own original contributions,
whereas in others it is focused on giving stimulating feed-
back to the human user, to drive their creativity further. This
may involve critique (i.e. communicated justiﬁed evalua-
tion), which is by some accounts at least as challenging as,
and important to, the creative process as generation.
Proceedings of the 11th International
Conference on Computational Creativity (ICCC’20)
ISBN: 978-989-54160-2-8
25
The rise of commercially successful conversational in-
terfaces has drawn attention to the potential for more ﬂuid
forms of interaction with creative AI systems that may sup-
port creativity in new ways, including co-creative interac-
tion that better resembles human-to-human co-creation. In
comparison to the potential of conversational interaction,
our current predominant model of human-computer interac-
tion for computational creativity is one in which we trigger
a ‘generate’ action on a traditional GUI interface and some
output is generated. We may then iterate the generation pro-
cess, tweaking parameters and selecting presets or data sets
to reﬁne our search, but essentially still engaging in a graphi-
cal instruction-based interaction modality, where a GUI pro-
vides the means to operate a given system. It is easy to see
why this makes it hard to consider the system as a particu-
larly active agent in the co-creation process.
Relative to this, a ‘new’ conversationally-grounded model
of interaction would step away from the limits of the GUI
interface and employ the open-ended nature of conversa-
tional interaction to support something more closely resem-
bling human-to-human co-creativity. This vision needs to
be unpacked, as current state-of-the-art conversational inter-
faces are often very constrained and do not guarantee to offer
greater open-endedness of interaction. It is not their conver-
sational interface per se that would afford greater creative
potential, but the capability of the underlying computational
creativity technology, for which any number of interface de-
signs might be suitable to exploit this capability.
We introduce the term ‘dialogic’ to help isolate what
qualities we are interested in, then, in terms of new forms of
productive creative interaction. Using this term, we hope to
avoid a simplistic interpretation of the term ‘conversational’,
as in the use of spoken word or written text as an interaction
modality. We note, however, that our use of the term is quite
closely aligned to Gordon Pask’s notion of ‘conversation’
theory (Pask 1975), with which we do associate some of the
qualities of dialogic interaction—this is a potential source of
confusion.
The core features of what we propose as dialogic creative
artiﬁcial intelligence (DCAI) are that:
1. In an iterative process, the system has the potential to ac-
tively and positively inﬂuence aspects of the creative ob-
jective, and that
2. It is in turn able to adapt intelligently to changing objec-
tives.
The ﬁrst feature establishes that the human-computer sys-
tem is a loosely coupled network of creative production,
through the mutual inﬂuence of its components.
We ac-
knowledge that this process of co-inﬂuence technically ap-
plies to a vast number of existing examples of creative tool
use: many researchers and practitioners have observed how
the tools they use may dictate the nature of creative out-
comes. This is captured in philosopher Lambros Malafouris’
description of the coupled interaction between potter, clay
and wheel: there is no predominant starting point in the
causal interaction that takes place as the pot is shaped, hence
no objective sense in which the potter is an isolated cre-
ative agent, distinct from the objects he interacts with. More
speciﬁcally, in our deﬁnition we require the inﬂuence to be
active and positive, meaning that the system’s inﬂuence on
the user takes place by design, not as a byproduct of some
other aspect of its design.
Thus if a creative process results in settling on a partic-
ular output (say a generated melody), but only because the
creator failed to get the system to do what she wanted, i.e.,
through compromise, then we should not admit this as ei-
ther an active or a positive act of inﬂuence by the system.
On the other hand, if the system stimulated us to think dif-
ferently and accept a certain type of output through persua-
sion or novel insight, then we would consider this active and
positive. We acknowledge that there are likely to be fuzzy
boundaries to this distinction.
The second feature requires the system to make contribu-
tions that are context-aware and responsive to the iterative
input from the user. We may say, vaguely, that the system is
truly engaged (and engaging) in the dialogue. Here and in
several of the terms above, we are not seeking exact deﬁni-
tions, nor aiming for ‘operationalisable’ deﬁnitions. All of
the above must be evaluated subjectively.
As an aside, we speculate that the second property
(adaptability) may be critical in establishing the ﬁrst (co-
inﬂuence): a system can only actively and positively inﬂu-
ence a creative process through proper engagement with the
human’s changing objectives. Again, the notion of ‘loose
coupling’ can be useful in thinking of how two actors com-
bine into a single temporary creative agency in the formation
of co-creative outcomes. All of this serves to say that our vi-
sion for future co-creative systems is one where they have
greater co-inﬂuence on the creative process, and that in do-
ing so the interactions we have with them can be considered
more dialogic than tool-like.
Motivations for Designing for Dialogic Creative AI
Our focus on dialogic systems is motivated in part by the
emerging interest in understandable AI, and in part by our
understanding of creative processes. Understandable AI is
important because people are known to be more inclined
to engage with faulty or less-effective AI systems if they
receive direct, understandable responses from them, when
compared to highly optimised systems that are neither di-
rectly responsive nor understandable (Oudah et al. 2018).
A lack of comprehension is known to lead to mistrust and
disuse of systems (Hancock et al. 2011), which in a creative
context we think means little to no adoption of our systems
beyond our own tight community.
Elaborating further on what it might mean to produc-
tively inﬂuence a creative process, we note that creativity
research has long examined the need for divergent, heuris-
tic, search-based cognitive work. This is often by deﬁnition:
many consider creative tasks as those for which a clear path
to the outcome is not known, and some form of blind (or
at least ambiguity-tolerant) search must be employed (e.g.,
(Simonton 2011; Perkins 1996; Sternberg and Lubart 1991;
Amabile 1996)). In human-human co-creativity, the tech-
nique of ‘brainstorming’ epitomises this type of divergent
search in the form of a formalised activity. Supporting ‘ex-
pansive’ search is one way in which a co-creativity tool
Proceedings of the 11th International
Conference on Computational Creativity (ICCC’20)
ISBN: 978-989-54160-2-8
26
might be expected to positively inﬂuence an outcome, and
we already have examples of such work in the literature. For
example, Karimi et al. demonstrate the use of a co-creative
sketching tool that aims to actively stimulate a greater di-
versity of outcomes, and hence greater ‘creativity’, achieved
through the stimulation of novelty, through its own sketch
suggestions (2019).
However, most of the above-cited models of the creative
process also stress that divergent search is, in itself, insufﬁ-
cient; there must be a process of review and ﬁltering that
tests ideas against goals and may drive the rethinking of
those goals. Various models of creativity also speciﬁcally
address the need for convergence, either in terms of conver-
gent forces that constrain and direct divergent search, or as
a separate phase. Simonton discusses the sketches used by
Picasso, leading to his masterpiece Guernica, which demon-
strate the presence of divergent blind search (2007). If noth-
ing else, convergence is implied in the fact that creative tasks
result in speciﬁc outcomes, but some tasks might involve
gradual reﬁnement. A dialogic co-creative process could
simply stimulate divergence and go no further, but we might
deﬁne it as more complete if it follows through to the pro-
cess of narrowing in on a ﬁnal outcome.
This also suggests that our two properties are related
through the idea of the co-creative partners being loosely
coupled; convergence can be achieved through the dual ac-
tions of the computer inﬂuencing outcomes but also adapt-
ing in a skilful, context-aware way, the success of which
would be in part due to its ability to support convergence
where relevant.
For convergent, focused creative development in particu-
lar, but also for expansive divergent development to a lesser
extent, we believe that the system must be good at adapt-
ing to context and be capable of explaining itself (or giving
context to its actions).
We note that as well as helping discover a solution that
ﬁts preconceived criteria, expansive search can also involve
arbitrariness, which helps frame future creative goals and
set helpful, narrowing constraints. It can be good to ‘just get
something on the table’. For example, Stokes’ research into
creative practice shows how artists set themselves up with
an individual style through the establishment of constraints,
which can in theory be arbitrary, as long as they serve to
isolate the artist’s individual style (2009).
Situating Dialogue in Different Interaction
Paradigms
As we note above, we do not think DCAI is necessarily
bound to conversational interaction (i.e., natural language),
but we do recognise that there is a natural ﬁt here.
We
believe dialogue could be achieved in a range of interac-
tion contexts as a way to exchange information about cre-
ative artefacts without necessarily exchanging information
through them. One natural situation for a dialogic interac-
tion would be a request-based scenario (Bown and Brown
2018), where the user requests the system to produce outputs
(“give me a funky bassline”) and then iterates in response to
what is offered (“make it more syncopated”, “more like that
last bit”). This requires some shared understanding of the
subject, which requires the system both to adapt its under-
standing and to communicate it. A good explainable system
might provide context or even be persuasive: “what about
something in the style of Stanley Clarke?”, or “a more syn-
copated rhythm would make sense against this drum beat”.
We also note that a more ‘ambient’ (Bown and Brown
2018) mode of interaction might also provide a solid foun-
dation for dialogic co-creativity. The bassline could simply
be playing along in its own track while the producer works
on something else, adapting to other elements in the mu-
sic, without much direct communication, but with contex-
tual factors inﬂuencing how the bassline develops.
These different modes, and the different levels of initia-
tive, encapsulation and agency they represent are important
to consider in terms of the overall user-experience and ac-
ceptance of the system. Clippy, the notorious Microsoft Pa-
perclip, was disliked by many users for its intrusiveness and
misplaced conﬁdence, but many of the services it offered
are actually automated as standard in today’s word proces-
sors (Maedche et al. 2016). Under the right circumstances
the user’s sense of the system’s involvement and engage-
ment might enhance the experience rather than be irritating
or counter-productive. Such design considerations can help
frame how forms of dialogic interaction can be useful in co-
creativity.
Analysis of an AI Music Production Tool
With this notion of DCAI in mind we turn to consider an
existing commercial AI music production tool in terms of
how these concepts play out in a provisionally co-creative
scenario. We have not attempted to set this up as a formal
user study because, to our knowledge, the tool is yet to be
adopted in real production scenarios, and we feel that this is
necessary for a formal user study to be relevant. Instead we
take a form of heuristic walk through the properties of the
system in a similar vein to types of heuristic evaluation used
in interaction design research (Nielsen 1995). The aim is
both to provide a worked example of how co-creative agents
can be more dialogic in their interactions, as well as to mo-
tivate why that would be a good idea.
The tool is Splash Pro, the ﬁrst offering of an end-user
tool from Australian Music AI startup Popgun. Splash Pro
is a generative creativity support tool aimed at amateur mu-
sic producers, which runs as a standalone piece of software
for Mac and Windows and also as a plugin for a number of
music production environments. It works in the symbolic
music domain, for which MIDI is the standard. We exam-
ined the tool running as a plugin for Ableton Live. This
analysis refers mainly to the design of the interface, not to
the generative capability of the system, although we recog-
nise that the two are intertwined.
Splash Pro has three generation modes—create, accom-
pany, and blend—with three different choices of instrument:
keys, bass and drums (vocals is also an instrument option,
but only in ‘create’ mode). Create mode produces a sin-
gle melodic line or chord sequence, bassline or drum beat,
with options to choose a style, which varies according to the
instrumentation chosen. Accompany mode produces an ac-
companying chord sequence, bassline or drum beat, given
Proceedings of the 11th International
Conference on Computational Creativity (ICCC’20)
ISBN: 978-989-54160-2-8
27
a source sequence to accompany. Blend mode generates an
original sequence, but does so as a musically valid interpo-
lation of two existing sequences, selected by the user.
In all cases, the interface requires the choice of a musical
key and a duration over which to generate (it may also make
use of the music’s time-signature, which is not an option in
the Splash interface, but can instead be accessed by plugins
from the host program, where it is a user-settable parameter.
Ditto with tempo). It also offers the user the choice to input
a four-chord progression over the given number of bars.
Further, for each combination of generation mode and in-
strument, the system offers a number of preset stylistic op-
tions, as well as a number of numeric parameters. For create
mode, with bass, preset options include either genre-tags:
electronic, hip-hop, pop, RnB and rock, with each genre
having subcategories such as hip-hop:boombap and hip-
hop:modern. Alternatively you can choose a “technique”
instead of a genre: long notes, short notes, on-the-beat short
notes, accent on beats 1 & 3, busy moving notes, plays to-
wards end of bar, short notes with groove, assortment of
grooves, funky groove, less funky groove, unstable funk, etc.
In addition, a set of numeric parameters can be modiﬁed:
variation, note length, root octave, velocity, swing, and den-
sity. For other instruments, the options are varied to reﬂect
that instrument. For example, for the numeric parameters
for keys, chordiness, timing and pitch range are added, and
swing and density are removed. This gives Splash Pro and
its users a strong and shared vocabulary for reasoning about
musical artefacts, which we see as a starting point for dia-
logic interaction.
Splash Pro has a graphical user interface based largely
on buttons, popup menus and sliders, meaning that it has a
deﬁned set of GUI operations and options, rather than al-
lowing any kind of open-ended construction of structures
or behaviours by the user—an “operation-based” interaction
paradigm (Bown and Brown 2018), as opposed to a request-
based or ambient paradigm. As such, it presents as a regular
software tool rather than a creative assistant.
It would be easy to conclude that such a tool does not
satisfy our deﬁnition of dialogic interaction. However, as a
generative software tool, we note that the system is implic-
itly involved in autonomously making ‘suggestions’ (even
though its outputs may not be conceived of as such). It is
widely documented how such output, even if not gathered
in a dialogic manner, can strongly inﬂuence creative outputs
when used by creative practitioners. Thus, in order to con-
sider a minimal form of dialogic interaction, it is interesting
to consider what would be needed to have the system adap-
tively respond, and complete a loop of loose coupling.
One option for extending Splash Pro would be enabling
the user to give feedback to the system, such as ratings that
might feed back into a generative process as an error sig-
nal (for example with reinforcement learning or evolution-
ary computing). This would permit adaptivity in both di-
rections: the system to actively inﬂuence the user, and the
user to actively inﬂuence the system. Alternatively, it could
be possible for the system to ‘ambiently’ adapt and respond
(which may not be evident through the GUI): even if the
user doesn’t give feedback, the system may be able to glean
information through their actions.
Without some form of these adaptive behaviours Splash
Pro, despite its extensive descriptive vocabulary, would
seem to fall short of our criteria for being a dialogic sys-
tem. This is no slight on the system: we are not convinced
any successful instances of this exist in current creative soft-
ware. Yet we might go even further in admitting Splash Pro
as a dialogic system, since it provides a means for a user to
feed it existing musical input, and through this input, it ac-
tually has a much more complicated interface than what is
visible in the GUI. To fully examine this interface requires
considering how someone might feed input into it.
Furthermore, through iterative processes, the user might
ﬁll in the gaps in what might make up a true dialogic interac-
tion. For example, if the user wants to explore the interaction
between different styles, they can combinatorially explore
this space by feeding outputs back into the system. They
could use the blend tool to blend two outputs that come from
the create tool, and they could also use the accompany tool
iteratively through different styles to create original combi-
nations. Our informal experiments with Splash Pro, as well
as with similar tools such as Google Magenta’s Ableton Live
plugin suite, have indicated that iterations of the generation
process, feeding back content into the system’s input, could
constitute what might be called a pseudo-dialogic process.
We assume the system is not adapting its internal state, but
from a philosophical standpoint, when the system is coupled
with the user and the musical content being worked on, the
musical input can be thought of as an external state.
Although there is no option for feedback and no evidence
of ambient adaptation in Splash Pro, we can still consider
how it affords a sense of dialogic interaction through the
user’s own exploration of its response to different inputs and
getting to know its behaviour. In the simplest sense, this is
afforded through the sense of suggestion given in the stylis-
tic parameters, as well as the sense of adaptation as the user
themselves adapts and gets to know the behaviour of each
of the generation settings. Since these are likely to be very
complex models with rich behaviour, this sense of adapta-
tion may be quite signiﬁcant, even if no actual adaptation is
happening.
Thus a rich enough system that was not adaptive could
still present a sense of dialogic interaction by enabling the
user to systematically iterate and progress ideas through
their use of the system, with the shared creative workspace
playing the role of a pseudo-adaptive intermediary: this may
be the case if the system has very rich behaviour or a rich
space of options, combined with some means to explore it.
Exploration by interaction here can include submitting dif-
ferent types of inputs to the system experimentally. Even
simple pop-up lists of options might be structured to create
rich interactive pathways through a co-creative process. The
system may have a large enough set of ‘canned’ responses to
user inputs that navigating its interface still gives the expe-
rience of adaptation and suggestion. These would not meet
our criteria for being dialogic, but they may increase a user’s
sense of the agency of the system.
A well-furnished vocabulary of terms shared between
user and agent is, we argue, not sufﬁcient to make a system
Proceedings of the 11th International
Conference on Computational Creativity (ICCC’20)
ISBN: 978-989-54160-2-8
28
dialogic—for that it needs to be adaptive as well as actively
and positively inﬂuencing the user. But a dialogic interface
could be built on top of the current Splash Pro UI to allow
the user to explore co-creation through the composition of
operations; composition here referring to the creative and
possibly adaptive iteration of these operations. Thus the user
could say, “could it have a bit more of a Latin feel?” and the
system could potentially present two or three different ways
in which that adaptation to user input could be offered, with
explanatory output to support that. The user could give pos-
itive or negative feedback on any such suggestions, driving
the system to adapt how it blends these processes, and the
system could offer more persuasive suggestions, drawing on
previous success.
A Case Study of a Professional Music
Production Process
We now turn to considering a real human-to-human co-
creative scenario, studied through observation.
Since di-
alogic creative AI systems—at least as we’re envisaging
them—don’t exist, we set out to investigate a collaborative
creative session between two musicians in order to identify
how their interaction was dialogic. We are not suggesting by
doing so that interaction with DCAI systems should imitate
human-to-human interaction. Instead, we seek inspiration
from human-to-human interaction to seed design ideas and
requirements.
Our subjects, Uncanny Valley (UV), are a commercial
music production studio based in Sydney. They are respon-
sible for producing cues for major television dramas, reality
TV, news and sport titles in Australia. They are also collabo-
rative partners in our research into usable computational cre-
ativity systems and interested in adopting creative AI tech-
niques in their workﬂow.
We observed two UV artists in a collaborative compo-
sition session: a producer, composer and keyboard player
(henceforth A), and a co-composer and guitarist (henceforth
B). Their brief was to create an alternative version of a track
already previously composed by them, and used for TV cov-
erage of a popular sports show. The alternative version was
being used to promote a speciﬁc event within the upcom-
ing season. The main melody of the original composition
was to be kept and the track reworked given a speciﬁc ref-
erence track from the popular music canon (“The Man” by
The Killers) which was provided by the client. B elaborates
that the aim of such reference music is not to “sound alike”
but to “vibe alike” to this reference, with a focus on tempo,
groove and sound (a ‘big’ sound in this case). This is a recur-
ring topic for the team who are often given reference tracks
in this way: “There’s nothing wrong with mentioning refer-
ences, to talk about where you’re headed, what you’re feel-
ing, but you know, we are always advising people to chase
the same feeling not the same song.” This gives a neat de-
scription of the creative task at hand: they seek to imitate the
mode, key and tempo, and a similar instrumentation of the
reference in a new arrangement of the provided melody.
During the observed session, which covered about half
of the entire production process, a guitar part (recorded au-
dio), chord progression (recorded MIDI), bassline (recorded
MIDI) and drum part (constructed MIDI and samples) were
laid down. Our focus is on the dialogic interaction between
A and B in the creative development of the guitar part, con-
sidering as a design exercise how B, as a collaborating mu-
sician, might be substituted by an AI system. We also con-
sider some of the other stages observed in order to give more
context to frame this hypothetical scenario.
In terminology elaborated on in previous work (Bown and
Brown 2018), we could describe A and B as interacting pri-
marily according to a client producer model—with B as pro-
ducer (of guitar content) to match A’s brief. This is a nested
relationship; the team of A and B are in turn producers re-
sponding to an external client’s brief. It is also not a strict
relationship, with B participating in direction as well, with
equal creative authority on the direction. In this sense, this
establishes the kind of complex interaction that we might
wish to imitate in a dialogic creative AI experience.
Participant A describes their standard studio process as
being heavily focused on a MIDI production paradigm using
software synths and audio effects, being quick and efﬁcient
and easily manipulable. They identify the guitar as a key
exception to this rule, being expressive, quick and robust to
record, and supporting a “big” sound, that is key to many
Western music styles, including the style the team identiﬁed
as necessary to meet the provided brief.
This section proceeds by talking through the creative pro-
cess, noting key observations along the way.
Observation
A required B to play the guitar to create a strummed rhythm
track that backs the main melodic line. However, the cre-
ation of the guitar part was more of an ideation that inﬂu-
enced the overall development of the musical structure and
was foundational to the establishment of other parts.
In the ﬁrst instance this was workshopped. A expressed
a basic brief which was discussed. They then prepared a
rough drum track which was described as a temporary guide
for playing to (not to be used in the ﬁnal version), which ex-
pressed the groove; A emphasising how critical it was to es-
tablish the groove right from the start. Here “groove” refers
to the basic rhythmic expression and emphasis.
A elaborates on the use of exploratory search in the early
stages of a track: “Writing a track from scratch is sometimes
a different process, but it will always start with a jam, either
on piano or guitar. Before we did [another track] recently,
it started with a played piano riff and then we wrote the
melody over the piano riff. Then after the song was pretty
much written as an entire thing, that’s when we started pro-
ducing it. Whereas this is more producing, writing at the
same time. I like to produce and write at the same time; it
saves time.”
A refers to the initial jams as “expression sessions”. B
elaborates: “I’m self-confessed not a master of any instru-
ment, just sort of spitballing at the wall, isn’t it? Mud at the
wall” B adds: “I’ll leave the room almost deliberately often
so that I can come back with observational power, otherwise
sitting here listening to everything; I’ll come back and go
‘Oh, it’s great, but that’s the hook!’ It’ll be like ‘Really?
Proceedings of the 11th International
Conference on Computational Creativity (ICCC’20)
ISBN: 978-989-54160-2-8
29
I thought this was the hook!’ like ‘No, that’s the hook!’
Because I can hear it from downstairs and it’s been going
around and around and I can hear people whistling it down-
stairs, whatever.” This highlights the iterative, negotiated
re-framing of the creative task: B even deliberately removes
themselves from the room in order to force the adoption of
a different perspective. Here, dialogue that inﬂuences the
creative objective is not only something that happens, but
something that is being actively sought.
A also elaborates further on the need for live variation: “if
you’ve got that little error there or little timing thing or that
little note that you play, little ghost note that you play that
you wouldn’t do by yourself then you’ve got an extra layer
of goodness there to add into the ﬁnal mix. That’s what gives
music it’s x-factor sometimes a little bit ... I’ve just learned
that over the years of producing, if there’s enough of that
random stuff, jammy stuff going on at the beginning, then at
the end you’ll have something a bit better.”
Reﬂecting this, the duo play together when recording
parts (A performing the main melody on a MIDI keyboard),
keeping eye contact, talking and using hand signals whilst
playing. This is described as being done to get the groove,
as well as being efﬁcient. There’s an interesting dichotomy
in the way they talk about efﬁciency: in the early stages
of an expression session, novelty, divergence and “jammy
stuff” are clearly valued, but as the process continues, the
focus shifts to speed and predictability, often after a speciﬁc
meta-discussion of the need to progress. We suspect this is a
common component of professional creativity: iteration and
exploration are necessary, but deadlines are always tight.
A says: “At the early compositional stage of a track and
ﬁnding all the bits and pieces that work together, if every
part is aware of every other part then you keep... I think
the reason I was jamming with B is because he can play
the guitar and I can’t, and I wanted to ﬁnd what keyboard
part was going to work over the guitar part, and then once
we’d recorded that we sort of went, what bass part’s going
to work with this? And with the groove. And often it’ll be
happy accidents with jamming as well.”
As well as using expansive, ambiguity-tolerant and di-
verse search processes to develop themes, the team also
elaborate on how this process feeds their ideas about the
overall structure of the track. It is apparent that determin-
ing the structure depends on speciﬁc content elements, and
that this is strongly interdependent—the speciﬁcs of the ele-
ments in turn depend on where they sit.
A says: “Sometimes it’s the case of thinking about what
we’re going to produce in the future while we’re writing the
riffs to understand what we need to get... That’s cool.” Thus
as they jam and isolate guitar parts they like, they collabo-
ratively develop a concept for the overall structure. This is
described as “groove 1, groove 2, chorus” at one point, but
later there is agreement that the second section is a variant of
the ﬁrst: “Groove 1, groove 1 on steroids, and then chorus”.
As the order of parts is locked down, the speciﬁc details of
the guitar riffs are also rapidly honed. A small handful of it-
erations of each take ensues, sometimes full repeats, clearly
converging on speciﬁc phrases. The transition between ex-
ploration and exploitation is fast, and often explicitly en-
couraged by B, who was expressing a desire for the session
to be as short as possible.
Having laid down the main part, the focus was turned to
more speciﬁc details, such as “turnaround” moments, vari-
ations on the main themes emphasising the transition from
one section to another, which involve discussion of the con-
text of the transition (from where to where).
Multiple parts involve more extended discussion between
A and B, taking different positions on what should be done.
One such question was whether the parts should play more
in unison or against each other. Through this back-and-forth,
the two musicians attempt to actively and positively inﬂu-
ence each other, and this dialogue is occurring both through
music and discussion: it is both communication-through-
creation and communication-about-creation.
Discussion
The human-human example clearly satisﬁes our deﬁnition
of dialogic interaction, beyond the simple fact that the par-
ticipants are in conversation. B inputs content that is in-
formed and inﬂuences A, but also adapts to A. The team are
very quick to converge on a stylistic focus, which combines
their musical expertise with their experience of working to-
gether. The team moves beyond issues of genre and style
rapidly to focus on ﬁner speciﬁcs. Once within this stylistic
focus, there continues to be a lot of rapid interaction which
takes place through talking, gesturing and playing. It is fast
and exploratory. We would describe their search phase as
exhibiting a rapidly iterated curve of expansion followed by
convergence. We note that during the expansive phase, many
factors are up in the air: the song structure has still yet to be
decided, and part of the convergence involves ﬁxing the con-
text for which the parts are being made. The collaborators
navigate this ambiguity by establishing a shared but abstract
dialogue about the desired qualities of the music: they don’t
need to debate extensively what a “big” sound is, they are
both familiar with each others’ stylistic vocabulary, and be-
ing too precise too early would harm the exploration.
We condense this to three observations regarding how a
generative system might better support a dialogic co-creative
process in a commercial music composition context, which
may carry to other areas of creative practice.
Firstly, interdependence: the compositional process in-
volved a great deal of interdependence (“all parts of the
track must talk to each other”). The overall track structure
depended on the components that arose and vice versa; it
was beneﬁcial to have parts played together to capture the
same groove, which was established early on, and to care-
fully consider what elements might move in tight unison.
Secondly, agreement of purpose: the use of a stylistic ref-
erence was made in very speciﬁc ways. Through their expe-
rience and shared understanding of the process, the team was
able to move very quickly into a very speciﬁc and targeted
ideation stage. There was substantial ambiguity in their rep-
resentation of this purpose, which was not just tolerated but
encouraged by both parties.
And thirdly, search processes: the team made early use of
fast-moving, expansive, exploratory (yet very stylistically-
focused) search, laying out lots of options, guided by rapid
Proceedings of the 11th International
Conference on Computational Creativity (ICCC’20)
ISBN: 978-989-54160-2-8
30
dialogue. They invited happy accidents and were attentive to
quick re-conceptualisations of their goals and expectations,
for example stepping out of the room. There was also very
rapid but necessary convergence through reﬁnement, once
a number of basic decisions had been made. These con-
vergences were often explicitly discussed, a kind of meta-
dialogue about the process that shows another critical role
for dialogic interaction.
We hypothesise that making our co-creative systems more
dialogic will help create that sense of shared narrative that is
known to characterise great human collaboration (Gottschall
2012). This is supported by our observational study—the
musicians quickly developed a shared, abstract description
for their piece that was more story than tight categorisation.
People exchange information, feelings, and intentions us-
ing narratives (Polletta et al. 2011; Bruner 2009), and our
proposed dialogic approach to co-creativity seeks to lever-
age this idea. Recent preliminary work in the domain of
human-machine teaming validates this approach by show-
ing that when AI systems are equipped with a rudimen-
tary form of narrative intelligence, they are more likely both
to establish and to maintain cooperative long-term relation-
ships with people (Crandall et al. 2018; Oudah et al. 2018;
Goodrich et al. 2018).
Narrative impacts people’s view of robots (Rosenthal-von
der P¨utten, Straßmann, and Mara 2017), including percep-
tions of their usefulness and behavioral intentions. For ex-
ample, Mara et al. observed that introducing robots as ﬁc-
tional characters increased people’s perceptions of a robot’s
usefulness and behavioral intentions (2013). When think-
ing about what will make co-creative systems more likely
to be adopted beyond their own creators, building trust and
perceived utility through narrative seems promising.
As
narrative is a ﬁeld of computational creativity in its own
right, it may even be possible to explicitly represent and
reason about this shared narrative that emerges from di-
alogic interaction, using ideas like co-operative narrative
generation (P´erez y P´erez 2015). Computational narrative
might also offer some ideas about how to evaluate dia-
logues (Kypridemou and Michael 2014; Rowe et al. 2009;
Wang, Chen, and Li 2017), an essential part of dialogic AI
that we’ve not touched on at all.
Dialogic interaction also has clear overlap with the notion
of explainable creative systems. End-user explainable AI
(as opposed to explainable techniques aimed at engineers
and researchers) is in its infancy, but as it develops it will
quickly become a critical component of co-creativity. With-
out the ability to explain suggestions, it will be impossible
for a system to persuade, critique, or justify its behaviour, all
of which would help build trust and acceptance (Zhu et al.
2018). Explainability has even been proposed as a possible
“meta-aesthetic”, or fundamental drive, for creative agents,
based on the notion that ineffable ideas—those that cannot
be expressed, or at least cannot be expressed concisely—are
ineffective (Bodily and Ventura 2018).
The notion we are trying to capture with DCAI—the idea
that co-creativity interaction should be about a shared dia-
logue through and about the work—is not a new one in AI.
Enactive AI proposes a focus on autonomy and adaptabil-
ity through interaction (Froese and Ziemke 2009), based on
the notion of enactive cognition. Enactive cognition posits
that reasoning arises through intentional interaction with the
environment, and places a great emphasis on communica-
tion, both linguistic and non-linguistic (Cuffari, Di Paolo,
and Jaegher 2014). This has been discussed in the ﬁeld of
creativity research as “distributed creativity” (Sawyer and
Dezutter 2009), the idea, reminiscent of Csikszentmihalyi’s
systems view (2014), that collaborative creativity is “nonin-
dividualistic”, and “emerges from the improvised dialogues
of the group”. Enactive cognition provides support for our
notion that dialogues can occur through interaction, and
therefore need not necessarily imply chatbots or voice in-
teraction, saying that co-operation can arise without “high-
level mental processes” like direct communication (Fantasia,
Jaegher, and Fasulo 2014).
Conclusion
We have proposed dialogic creative AI, a class of compu-
tationally co-creative system that we hypothesise is worthy
of further study. DCAI has two core features: both human
and artiﬁcial agents must have the potential to actively inﬂu-
ence the creative objective, and must be able to adapt their
behaviour as those objectives change. We have based this
deﬁnition on the outcomes of establishing dialogue, rather
than by deﬁning dialogue itself. This focus exists because
we want to capture a broader range of communication than
traditional direct exchange of language—we want to capture
both dialogue-through-artefacts as well as dialogue-about-
artefacts. In short: It’s not sufﬁcient to slap an explana-
tory chatbot on top of your generative model, although that
sounds like an excellent starting point. Our deﬁnition con-
tends that there must be two-way inﬂuence and adaptability.
We believe focusing on dialogue construed this way is essen-
tial for building creative systems that will be more broadly
adopted in the future. Making that a reality will mean grap-
pling with a host of related ideas: explainability, framing,
critique, initiative, intent, meta-aesthetics, and more.
Acknowledgements
The informal study of Splash Pro was assisted by Chloe Mc-
Fadden, a student in the Bachelor of Media Arts, UNSW,
acting as a research intern. This work was supported by
the Australian Research Council Discovery Project grant
DP200101059.
References
Amabile, T. 1996. Creativity in Context. Westview Press.
Auger, J. 2013. Speculative design: crafting the speculation.
Digital Creativity 24(1):11–35.
Bodily, P., and Ventura, D. 2018. Explainability: An aes-
thetic for aesthetics in computational creative systems. In
Proceedings of 9th the International Conference on Compu-
tational Creativity, 153–160.
Bown, O., and Brown, A. R. 2018. Interaction design for
metacreative systems.
In New Directions in Third Wave
Human-Computer Interaction: Volume 1 - Technologies.
Springer.
Proceedings of the 11th International
Conference on Computational Creativity (ICCC’20)
ISBN: 978-989-54160-2-8
31
Bruner, J. S. 2009. Actual Minds, Possible Worlds. Harvard
University Press.
Crandall, J. W.; Oudah, M.; Tennom; Ishowo-Oloko, F.;
Abdallah, S.; Bonnefon, J. F.; Cebrian, M.; Shariff, A.;
Goodrich, M. A.; and Rahwan, I. 2018. Cooperating with
machines. Nature Communications 9, Article No. 233.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. 2014. Society, culture, and person:
A systems view of creativity. In The Systems Model of Cre-
ativity. Springer. 47–61.
Cuffari, E.; Di Paolo, E.; and Jaegher, H. 2014. From par-
ticipatory sense-making to language: There and back again.
Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 14:1089–1125.
Fantasia, V.; Jaegher, H.; and Fasulo, A. 2014. We can
work it out: An enactive look at cooperation. Frontiers in
Psychology 5:874.
Froese, T., and Ziemke, T. 2009. Enactive artiﬁcial intel-
ligence: Investigating the systemic organization of life and
mind. Artiﬁcial Intelligence 173(3–4):466–500.
Goodrich, M. A.; Crandall, J. W.; Oudah, M.; and Mathema,
N. 2018. Using narrative to enable longitudinal human-robot
interactions. In Proceedings of the HRI2018 Workshop on
Longitudinal Human-Robot Teaming.
Gottschall, J. 2012. The Storytelling Animal: How Stories
Make Us Human. Houghton Mifﬂin Harcourt.
Hancock, P. A.; Billings, D. R.; Schaefer, K. E.; Chen, J.
Y. C.; De Visser, E. J.; and Parasuraman, R. 2011. A meta-
analysis of factors affecting trust in human-robot interaction.
Human Factors 53(5):517–527.
Karimi, P.; Maher, M. L.; Davis, N.; and Grace, K. 2019.
Deep learning in a computational model for conceptual
shifts in a co-creative design system. In Proceedings of the
10th International Conference on Computational Creativity,
17–24.
Kypridemou, E., and Michael, L.
2014.
Narrative simi-
larity as common summary: Evaluation of behavioral and
computational aspects. Literary and Linguistic Computing
29(4):532–560.
Lubart, T. 2005. How can computers be partners in the cre-
ative process: Classiﬁcation and commentary on the special
issue.
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies
63(4):365–369.
Maedche, A.; Morana, S.; Schacht, S.; Werth, D.; and
Krumeich, J. 2016. Advanced user assistance systems. Busi-
ness & Information Systems Engineering 58(5):367–370.
Mara, M.; Appel, M.; Ogawa, H.; Lindinger, C.; Ogawa, E.;
Ishiguro, H.; and Ogawa, K. 2013. Tell me your story, robot.
Introducing an android as ﬁction character leads to higher
perceived usefulness and adoption intention. In Proceedings
of the 8th ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-
Robot Interaction (HRI), 193–194.
McCormack, J. 2008. Facing the future: Evolutionary pos-
sibilities for human-machine creativity. In Romero, J., and
Machado, P., eds., The Art of Artiﬁcial Evolution: A Hand-
book on Evolutionary Art and Music. Springer-Verlag: Hei-
delberg, Germany. 417–451.
Nielsen, J.
1995.
10 usability heuristics for user
interface design.
https://www.nngroup.com/articles/ten-
usability-heuristics/. Nielsen Norman Group.
Oudah, M.; Rahwan, T.; Crandall, T.; and Crandall, J. W.
2018.
How AI wins friends and inﬂuences people in re-
peated games with cheap talk. In Proceedings of the 32nd
National Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 1519–1526.
Pask, G. 1975. Conversation, Cognition and Learning. New
York: Elsevier.
P´erez y P´erez, R. 2015. A computer-based model for col-
laborative narrative generation. Cognitive Systems Research
36–37:30–48.
Perkins, D. N. 1996. Creativity: Beyond the Darwinian
paradigm. In Boden, M., ed., Dimensions of Creativity. MIT
Press. chapter 5, 119–142.
Polletta, F.; Chen, P. C. B.; Gardner, B. G.; and Motes, A.
2011. The sociology of storytelling. Annual Review of So-
ciology 37:109–130.
Rosenthal-von der P¨utten, A.; Straßmann, C.; and Mara, M.
2017. A long time ago in a galaxy far, far away...The effects
of narration and appearance on the perception of robots. In
Proceedings of the 26th IEEE International Symposium on
Robot and Human Interactive Communication, 1169–1174.
Rowe, J. P.; McQuiggan, S. W.; Robison, J. L.; Marcey,
D. R.; and Lester, J. C. 2009. STORYEVAL: An empiri-
cal evaluation framework for narrative generation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 30th National Conference on Artiﬁcial Intel-
ligence, 103–110.
Sawyer, K., and Dezutter, S. 2009. Distributed creativity:
How collective creations emerge from collaboration. Psy-
chology of Aesthetics, Creativity, and the Arts 3:81–92.
Shneiderman, B. 1983. Direct manipulation: A step beyond
programming languages. Computer 16(8):57–69.
Simonton, D. K. 2007. The creative process in Picasso’s
Guernica sketches: Monotonic improvements versus non-
monotonic variants. Creativity Research Journal 19(4):329–
344.
Simonton, D. K. 2011. Creativity and discovery as blind
variation: Campbell’s (1960) BVSR model after the half-
century mark. Review of General Psychology 15(2):158.
Sternberg, R. J., and Lubart, T. I. 1991. An investment the-
ory of creativity and its development. Human Development
34(1):1–31.
Stokes, P. D. 2009. Using constraints to create novelty: A
case study. Psychology of Aesthetics, Creativity, and the Arts
3(3):174.
Wang, T.; Chen, P.; and Li, B. 2017. Predicting the qual-
ity of short narratives from social media. In Proceedings of
the International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
3859–3865.
Zhu, J.; Liapis, A.; Risi, S.; Bidarra, R.; and Youngblood,
G. M.
2018.
Explainable AI for designers: A human-
centered perspective on mixed-initiative co-creation. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computational Intelli-
gence and Games, 1–8. IEEE.
Proceedings of the 11th International
Conference on Computational Creativity (ICCC’20)
ISBN: 978-989-54160-2-8
32
