 
 
 
University Institute of Lisbon, School of Social Sciences and Humanities 
Department of Social and Organizational Psychology 
 
 
Boosting Children’s Creativity through 
Creative Interactions with Social Robots 
 
Patrícia Alves-Oliveira 
 
Thesis specially presented for the fulfillment of the degree of Doctor in Psychology 
Thesis performed under the co-affiliations: Human-Robot Collaboration & Companionship Lab 
at Cornell University, and INESC-ID from Instituto Superior Técnico, Universidade de Lisboa 
 
 
Supervisor: 
Ph.D. Patrícia Arriaga, Assistant Professor 
Iscte - University Institute of Lisbon 
Co-supervisors: 
Ph.D. Ana Paiva, Full Professor 
Instituto Superior Técnico, Universidade de Lisboa 
Ph.D. Guy Hoffman, Associate Professor 
Cornell University 
 
 
 
 
 January, 2020 
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Research reported in this dissertation was financed by the Portuguese Foundation for Science and 
Technology (FCT) via an individual PhD grant to the author (SFRH/BD/110223/2015). 
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
3 
 
Abstract 
Creativity is an ability with psychological and developmental benefits. Creative levels are 
dynamic and oscillate throughout life, with a first major decline occurring at the age of 7 years 
old. However, creativity is an ability that can be nurtured if trained, with evidence suggesting an 
increase in this ability with the use of validated creativity training. Yet, creativity training for 
young children (aged between 6-9 years old) appears as scarce. Additionally, existing training 
interventions resemble test-like formats and lack of playful dynamics that could engage children 
in creative practices over time. This PhD project aimed at contributing to creativity stimulation 
in children by proposing to use social robots as intervention tools, thus adding playful and 
interactive dynamics to the training. Towards this goal, we conducted three studies in schools, 
summer camps, and museums for children, that contributed to the design, fabrication, and 
experimental testing of a robot whose purpose was to re-balance creative levels. Study 1 (n = 
140) aimed at testing the effect of existing activities with robots in creativity and provided initial 
evidence of the positive potential of robots for creativity training. Study 2 (n = 134) aimed at 
including children as co-designers of the robot, ensuring the robot’s design meets children’s 
needs and requirements. Study 3 (n = 130) investigated the effectiveness of this robot as a tool 
for creativity training, showing the potential of robots as creativity intervention tools. In sum, 
this PhD showed that robots can have a positive effect on boosting the creativity of children. 
This places social robots as promising tools for psychological interventions. 
Keywords: creativity, social robots, children, intervention 
PsycINFO Codes: 3500 Educational Psychology; 3350 Specialized Interventions; 
4010 Human Factors Engineering; 4140 Robotics. 
 
 
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
4 
 
Resumo 
Criatividade é uma habilidade com benefícios no desenvolvimento saudável. Os níveis de 
criatividade são dinâmicos e oscilam durante a vida, sendo que o primeiro maior declínio 
acontece aos 7 anos de idade. No entanto, a criatividade é uma habilidade que pode ser nutrida se 
treinada e evidências sugerem um aumento desta habilidade com o uso de programas validados 
de criatividade. Ainda assim, os programas de criatividade para crianças pequenas (entre os 6-9 
anos de idade) são escassos. Adicionalmente, estes programas adquirem o formato parecido ao 
de testes, faltando-lhes dinâmicas de brincadeira e interatividade que poderão motivar as crianças 
a envolverem-se em práticas criativas ao longo do tempo. O presente projeto de doutoramento 
procurou contribuir para a estimulação da criatividade em crianças propondo usar robôs sociais 
como ferramenta de intervenção, adicionando dinâmicas de brincadeira e interação ao treino. 
Assim, conduzimos três estudos em escolas, campos de férias, e museus para crianças que 
contribuíram para o desenho, fabricação, e teste experimental de um robô cujo objetivo é ser uma 
ferramenta que contribui para aumentar os níveis de criatividade. O Estudo 1 (n = 140) procurou 
testar o efeito de atividade já existentes com robôs na criatividade e mostrou o potencial positivo 
do uso de robôs para o treino criativo. O Estudo 2 (n = 134) incluiu crianças como co-designers 
do robô, assegurando que o desenho do robô correspondeu às necessidades das crianças. O 
Estudo 2 (n = 130) investigou a eficácia deste robô como ferramenta para a criatividade, 
demonstrando o seu potencial para o treino da criatividade. Em suma, o presente doutoramento 
mostrou que os robôs poderão ter um potencial criativo em atividades com crianças. Desta 
forma, os robôs sociais poderão ser ferramentas promissoras em intervenções na psicologia. 
Palavras-chave: criatividade, robôs sociais, crianças, intervenção
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
5 
 
Acknowledgments 
Doing a PhD is so much about the journey. I want to express my gratitude to everyone 
who walked with me during these years. I would like to start expressing my deepest gratitude to 
all of my supervisors, Patrícia Arriaga, Guy Hoffman, and Ana Paiva. I have been honored to 
work with them and everything I accomplished would not have been possible without their 
mentorship, guidance, and trust. Each of my supervisors comes from a different discipline and 
the combination of this interdisciplinary mentorship from the fields of psychology, computer 
science, mechanical engineering, and robotics, enabled me to grow and expand in ways I could 
never image. I want to thank Patrícia for her incredible capacity to work side-by-side with me, 
and for teaching me to deepen my scientific thought over and over again. This empowered me 
with the necessary tools to achieve my PhD goals and extended my capacity as a researcher. It 
was in those moments that I re-connected with the passion that brought me to academia in the 
first place. I would like to thank Guy for being such an incredible role model. I could not have 
asked for a more inspirational, passionate, and visionary mentor. Our weekly meetings, the 
classes, and the lab discussions taught me the precious value of hard work. Guy helped me stick 
through the hard times of my PhD, to never give up, and to see the beauty of the process. This 
strengthen my persistence and endurance and showed me the importance of owing my own 
work. I am deeply grateful for having Ana as my supervisor. Ana has been a passionate mentor 
even before the beginning of my PhD as we have been working together for 7 years now! Ana’s 
vast experience guided me throughout the different aspects of the academic world, teaching me 
how grow into an independent researcher. I am grateful for all the opportunities that Ana 
provided and for always being available to mobilize resources which resulted in unique 
opportunities for connecting and collaborating with others.  
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
6 
 
I am profoundly grateful to Cecília Aguiar, who was part of my external committee since 
the very beginning of my PhD. The annual feedback from Cecilia was essential to clarify where I 
made progress and where I should be focusing next. 
I also want to express my gratitude to Oren Zuckerman from IDC Herzliya, for taking me 
at the Media and Innovation Lab in Israel for a summer internship. The hands-on experience vibe 
of this lab was contagious and absolutely eye-opening for new ways of conducting research. Not 
to mention that Tel-Aviv provided a great cuisine, weather, and a fantastic cultural background 
experience! 
Additionally, I take this chance to thank who helped me navigate throughout the PhD 
bureaucracy. A super thanks to Marco Rego, Marcia Sawyer, and Sandra Sá. Bureaucracy rocks 
with you! 
Having three supervisors from three different universities, made me privileged to belong 
to several different labs where I met incredible, outstanding, and intelligent people. Sharing my 
daily struggles and accomplishments with them was a life-savior. From my Lab at Iscte, I wish to 
thank Isa Figueira, Inês de Oliveira, Eduardo Reis, and Sara Soares. From Cornell University, I 
want to thank Michael Sugitan, Vighnesh Vatsal, Matt Law, Thais Campos, Doga Yücalan, and 
Samalis Santini. From Instituto Superior Técnico (INESC-ID), I want to thank Kim Baraka, 
Filipa Correia, Tiago Ribeiro, Miguel Vasco, and Sofia Petisca. I want to give a special thanks to 
all the people that directly contributed to my PhD project. To Margarida Antunes, Ana Bispo, 
Ankita Chandak, Albert Chu, Ian Cloutier, Rebecca Cooper, Matthew A. Cronin, Samuel 
Gomes, Priyanka Kompella, Beatriz Maia, Diogo Martins, Peter Moegenburg, Daniel Mota, 
Andreia Nóbrega, Daniela Nunes, André Pires, Isabel Valverde, and Carla Xavier - thank you 
very much, you were all essential elements of this work! 
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
7 
 
Iscte, Cornell University, and Instituto Superior Técnico (INESC-ID) were incredible 
places to develop my work. I enjoyed so much the surrounding nature in Cornell as it always 
centered my mind and made me at peace. I enjoyed Iscte and INESC-ID in Lisbon as they are 
located in my home city, which meant I got to be close to so many people that are dear to me. To 
my friends in Lisbon that know me for so many years, I am grateful for all the many times we 
got together for dinner, drinks, dancing, and late-night conversations. Thank you with all my 
heart Filipa Oliveira, Mafalda Magalhães, Ricardo Pereira, Ana Isabel, Daniel Pimentel, and 
Ricardo Major. During my PhD, I lived in five different houses between Lisbon and Ithaca. I had 
incredible and fun roommates and I will never forget the delicious dinners we cooked together. 
Thank you so much for the good times Alberto Provedel, Guillaume Bauchet, Silvia Tulli, Rita 
Tulha, Peter Daboczi, Fabian Giska, Ela Correa, Sijan Khan, and Sabrina. You have made my 
life so much better. 
I want to thank my family for everything. Words cannot contain all the love and gratitude 
I feel. I am deeply grateful to my mom and my dad for supporting my studies and valuing the 
presence of education in my life. Nothing of what I accomplished would have been possible 
without their incredible efforts, love, and caring for me. I want to thank my mom, Fernanda, for 
teaching me to be the best version of myself in everything I do. I have learned so much just by 
looking at how she does things. I am thankful to Tobias for being the most amazing, goofy, and 
smart brother in the world. It has been a pleasure to grow up together with him. I have the most 
magical, beautiful, and brave sister in the world, Jessica. I want to thank her for all the things she 
has taught me, most of them unintentionally and without being aware of it. I want to thank 
Christoforo, my boyfriend, who I am so happy to have met. He is the best partner in all my 
adventures.  
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
8 
 
On a more technical note, I am grateful for all the children, parents, teachers, and staff 
that embraced my project and with whom I have collaborated during these years. Specifically, I 
would like to thank Colégio Campo de Flores, Colégio Cocas, Ardozia, The Inventores, Colégio 
São Francisco de Assis, Sciencenter, Colégio da Fonte, Colégio Pedro Arrupe, Cayuga Heights 
Elementary, Ithaca Community Childcare Centre, and Associação Infante Sagres. I also want to 
express my gratitude to Professor Sara Ibérico Nogueira for the time she has put on training me 
within the field of creativity research.  
On a lighter note, I want to thank my classic ballet teachers Palmira Camargo, Miranda 
Strichartz, Cindy Reid, and Rachel Myers, who taught me ballet in the many cities I lived during 
my PhD. I also want to thank Juliana and Mark for their classes. Ballet is all about perfecting 
movements by repetition and not giving up during hard poses. This is what makes a dancer move 
forward in the practice. This philosophy somehow accompanied my PhD, leading me to find the 
beauty of hard work, method, and focus.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
9 
 
Table of Contents 
Index of Tables……………………………………………………………………………….…12 
Index of Figures…………………………………………………………………………………13 
Index of Acronyms……………………………………………………………………………...16 
Chapter 1. General introduction………………………………………………………………18 
 
Overview of the current thesis…………………………………………………………...19 
Studying social robots with a psychology lens…………………………………………..24 
Chapter 2. Theoretical underpinnings………………………………………………………...27 
Abstract…………………………………………………………………………………..28 
 
Social humans and social robots…………………………………………………………29 
 
Social robots design space……………………………………………………………….45 
 
Creativity definition, development, and measurement…………………………………..54 
Chapter 3. Systematic review of creativity interventions for children……………………...59 
 
Abstract…………………………………………………………………………………..60 
 
Introduction………………………………………………………………………………61 
 
Theoretical Background………………………………………………………………….62 
 
Method…………………………………………………………………………………...65 
Taxonomy of Creativity Interventions…………………………………………………...85 
Results……………………………………………………………………………………89 
Discussion………………………………………………………………………………110 
Conclusion…………………………………………………………………………...…113 
Highlights……………………………………………………………………………….116 
Implications for this Thesis……………………………………………………………..116 
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
10 
 
Chapter 4. Activities with robots to unlock creative potentials…………………………….118 
Abstract…………………………………………………………………………………119 
Theoretical background………………………………………………………………...120 
Method………………………………………………………………………………….123 
Results…………………………………………………………………………………..130 
Discussion………………………………………………………………………………135 
Highlights……………………………………………………………………………….138 
Implications for this thesis……………………………………………………………...138 
Chapter 5. Designing, fabricating, and programming YOLO, a robot for creativity…….140 
Abstract…………………………………………………………………………………141 
Theoretical background……………………………………………………………...…142 
Designing YOLO……………………………………………………………………….146 
Building YOLO………………………………………………………………………...176 
Programming YOLO…………………………………………………………………...191 
Conclusion……………………………………………………………………………...203 
Highlights……………………………………………………………………………….204 
Implications for this thesis……………………………………………………………...204 
Chapter 6. Empirical evidence of robots as creativity-flourishing tools…………………...205 
Theoretical background………………………………………………………………...206 
Method……………………………………………………………………….…………210 
Results…………………………………………………………………………………..221 
Discussion………………………………………………………………………………227 
Highlights……………………………………………………………………………….230 
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
11 
 
Chapter 7. General discussion……………………..……………………..……………..……231 
Reflections for Future Studies in Child-Robot Interaction for Creativity……………...235 
References……………………..……………………..……………………..………………….239 
Appendix……………………..……………………..……………………..…………………...320 
Appendix A……………………………………………………………………………..321 
Appendix B………………………………………………..……………………………322 
 
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
12 
 
Index of Tables 
Table 1. Summary of selected definitions of creativity…………………………………………56 
Table 2. Inclusion and exclusion criteria according to PICO Framework………………………66 
Table 3. Search-terms used in different databases………………………………………………68 
Table 4. Descriptors of the studies included in the systematic review………………………….73 
Table 5. Quality assessment……………………………………………………………,,,,,,……82 
Table 6. Taxonomy of the creativity elements……………………………………………..……90 
Table 7. Level of analysis of creativity interventions…………………,………………………106 
Table 8. Sample demographics ………………………………………………………………..124  
Table 9. Adaptation of the terminology of personalities for children…….……………………129 
Table 10. Values of TCT-DP according to study conditions………………………………..…131 
Table 11. Mean values of TCT-DP dimension adaptiveness and innovativeness..……………134 
Table 12. Design Process of the robot …………………………………………………………159 
Table 13. Design files to build YOLO…………………………………………………………182 
Table 14. Materials and their usages required to initialize YOLO.……………………………189 
Table 15. YOLO software functionalities………………………..……………………………196 
Table 16. Sample demographics of eligible participants as a function of conditions…….……211 
Table 17. Comparison of conditions according to controlled variables ………………………222 
Table 18. Zero-order correlations between variables……………………………………..……223 
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
13 
 
Index of Figures 
Figure 1. Example of an interaction between children and YOLO………………………...…...21 
Figure 2. Roadmap for the present thesis’ chapters.………………………….…………………23 
Figure 3. Research space of the current thesis.……………….…………………………………24 
Figure 4. Visual summary of the Extended Classification Framework…………………………30 
Figure 5. Summary of robot’s appearance classification.……………….………………………34 
Figure 6. Classification of relational roles of robots towards humans………………..…………37 
Figure 7. Six roles that children might have in the design of new technologies………..………47 
Figure 8. Flow chart of data collection of articles according to PRISMA-P guidelines……..…70 
Figure 9. Quality assessment……………………………………………………………………72 
Figure 10. Taxonomy of Creativity Elements…………………………...………………………86 
Figure 11. Recency of publications on creativity interventions for children.………………...…99 
Figure 12. World map of publications of creativity interventions.……………...……………..100 
Figure 13. Word cloud extracted from the keywords of publications…………………………101 
Figure 14. Percentage of the attributes of creativity.………………………………..…………102 
Figure 15. Dash and Dot robots used for the study………...……………………………..……128 
Figure 16. Paper prototypes used for the study……………………….…………………..……130 
Figure 17. Changes of TCT-DP global scores…………………………………………………132 
Figure 18. Difference between pre- and post-testing for each TCT-DP item…………….……133 
Figure 19. Changes of TCT-DP innovativeness………………………….……………………135 
Figure 20. Roadmap of the work performed to develop YOLO………………………………145 
Figure 21. Iterative prototypes of the robot……………………………………………………161 
Figure 22. Children using cube-toys as stand-ins for group storytelling………………………162 
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
14 
 
Figure 23. Paper-cubes used during the co-design study with children………………..………164 
Figure 24. Example of a sketch produced by a child using paper-cube………………..………165 
Figure 25. Children playing with the robot and picking cards…………………………………168 
Figure 26. Perspective views of YOLO……………………………………………..…………177 
Figure 27. Detailed views on YOLO robot…………………………………………….………178 
Figure 28. YOLO’s drawing with main dimensions……………...……………………………180 
Figure 29. YOLO’s exploded view……………………………………………………….……181 
Figure 30. YOLO parts lineup…………………………………………………………………183 
Figure 31. Close-ups on YOLO’s inside.………………………………………………………184 
Figure 32. YOLO’s assembly flow…………………………………………….………………186 
Figure 33. Wiring schematics of YOLO with visual components………………..……………188 
Figure 34. Operating instructions for YOLO…………………………………………..………190 
Figure 35. Storytelling arcs associated with creativity techniques……………………….……192 
Figure 36. Architecture of the modules that compose YOLO software……….………………197 
Figure 37. Workflow of the ML algorithm for shape recognition used by YOLO……………198 
Figure 38. Movement shapes performed by YOLO.…………………………………………..199 
Figure 39. State machine diagram………………………...……………………………………200 
Figure 40. Use-case example of a child using YOLO…………………………………………201 
Figure 41. Play sequence between a child and the YOLO robot.………………………...……209 
Figure 42. Time measurements included Latency and Exploration time.…………..…………217 
Figure 43. Increase in verbal creativity (CREA) from pre to post-test………...………………225 
Figure 44. Duration of story creation as a function of conditions …………………….………226 
Figure 45. Latency time to generate ideas as a function of conditions ……………………..…227 
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
15 
 
Figure 46. Main contributions of this thesis organized by chapters.…………………………233 
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
16 
 
List of Acronyms 
HRI………………………………………………...……………………………Human-Robot Interaction 
HCI………………………………………………………………………….Human-Computer Interaction 
WoZ………………………………………………………………………………………….Wizard of Oz 
UCD………………………………………………………………………………...User-Centered Design 
PD…………………………………………………………………………………….Participatory Design 
AI…………………………………………………………………………………….Artificial Intelligence 
ML………………………………………………………………………………………Machine Learning 
 
 
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“Num país e num mundo onde há famílias sem casa e doentes sem tratamento e sem hospital a 
questão da liberdade de criação artística e intelectual pode parecer uma questão secundária. 
Mas sabemos que a cultura influi na estrutura social e na estrutura política. 
E, por isso, a questão da liberdade na cultura é uma questão primordial.” 
Sophia de Mello Breyner Anderson 
Intervenção na Assembleia Constituinte em 1975 
 
 
(In English) 
“In a country and in a world where there are families without a home and patients without 
treatment and a hospital, the issue of freedom of artistic and intellectual creation may seem a 
secondary issue. 
But we know that culture influences the social structure and the political structure. 
And, therefore, the issue of freedom in culture is a primary issue.” 
Sophia de Mello Breyner Anderson 
Intervention at the Constitutional Assembly in 1975. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
18 
Chapter 1. General introduction 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
19 
Overview of the Current Thesis 
Robinson (2001) characterized creativity as being at the heart of what it means to be 
human. During childhood, we spend most of our time between fantasy and pretend play, creating 
new worlds, exploring, and living in fantasy (Russ, Robins, & Christiano, 1999). As we grow 
older, critical thinking skills take over and gradually we let go of the creative elasticity that our 
brain was functioning for. Despite becoming more efficient and skilled as adults, we also become 
less risk-taking, exploratory, and original (Gopnik, Griffiths, & Lucas, 2015; Roberts, & 
Mroczek, 2008). We, therefore, might trait our fearless creative imagination for a more grounded 
sense of the world. 
Creativity is considered one of the highest human cognitive abilities with innumerous 
benefits to health and personal growth (Krathwohl, & Anderson, 2009). It is a skill related to 
one’s well-being and healthy development (Collard, & Looney, 2014) and relates to our sense of 
self-expression and identity (Collard & Looney, 2014; Robinson, 2011). It sets up the mood for 
joy, wonder, excitement, efficiency, and pleasure into moments of our lives (Baer, 2017; 
Kaufman, 2018b). Creativity is considered a transferable skill since it benefits different areas of 
human development and growth (Chadha, 2006). Additionally, competencies of problem-solving 
and thinking outside of the box and rewarded in later life stages (Kaufman, 2018b) as they 
constitute one of the most sought-after workforce skills due to the shift of developed societies 
from industrialized to creative economies (Robinson, 2011). Indeed, creativity during childhood 
appears as a predictor of creativity levels in adulthood (Ayman-Nolley, 1992). Therefore, it is 
crucial to stimulate this ability in the early stages of life. 
Despite its benefits, creativity levels are dynamic during life and tend to suffer a first 
major oscillation around the age of 7 years old (Kogan, 1973; Sawyer et al., 2003; Spodek & 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
20 
Saracho, 2014). At this age, a tendency for creativity levels to decrease is reported to occur in a 
phenomenon named “creativity crisis” (Kim, 2011). This decline has been associated with 
diverse factors, such as formal education and conformity behaviors towards peers, among others 
(Runco, Acar, & Cayirdag, 2017). Nonetheless, creativity is a skill that can be developed if 
trained (Scott, Leritz, & Mumford, 2004). Existing creativity training programs for young 
children have been designed, developed, and validated. While some of these programs include 
play dynamics that engage children in the training process, others still resemble test-like formats, 
lacking joyful and playful elements. Therefore, there is a need to continue developing programs 
that are pleasurable for children (Chan, & Yuen, 2014; Kogan, 1973; Runco, Acar, & Cayirdag, 
2017).  
Given the benefits of creativity but also its decline in early ages of life, this thesis aims to 
contribute to nurturing this ability in young children. As current intervention programs for 
creativity are scarce and given the willingness of children to interact with technology (Belpaeme, 
Kennedy, Ramachandran, Scassellati, & Tanaka, 2018), we proposed to use social robots as tools 
for creativity interventions. Towards this goal, we have designed, fabricated, and tested a social 
robot for storytelling interactions with children. During the interaction with the robot in the 
context of storytelling, we expect to positively impact on their creativity levels. This thesis thus 
relies on knowledge from different disciplines, including Psychology, Design Research, and 
Human Robot-Interaction (HRI) (see Figure 1).  
The primary goal of this PhD work was to contribute to increasing creativity in children. 
To do so, we have developed a social robot named YOLO that was used as part of an 
intervention to promote creativity. The intervention for creativity development consisted of a  
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
21 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Example of an interaction between children and YOLO during storytelling play. 
Children move the robots on the floor as a storytelling character stand-in. Based on the 
trajectories detected by the robots’ motion sensors, they take on different personalities that either 
mirror or contrast the children’s story lines, as a creativity-stimulating technology intervention. 
Retrieved from Alves-Oliveira, Arriaga, Paiva, and Hoffman (under review). 
 
storytelling activity between children and the robot in which the robot autonomously acted as a 
character for children’s stories. Through the interaction between children and the robot, 
creativity is expected to be promoted (see Figure 1)1 (Alves-Oliveira, Arriaga, Paiva, & 
Hoffman, 2020). For this to occur, the robot behavior was designed to include behaviors that 
potentially could trigger creativity responses during the interaction. This thesis includes literature 
review om creativity, the development of a robotic character as a way to innovate creativity 
training, and an experimental study to test the effects of the intervention. The present document 
is organized as follows (see Figure 2): 
 
1We present a video describing the research intervention and technical features of the robot that designed and 
developed to be an intervention tool for creativity: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e-K3J5UZ9M4&feature=youtu.be. 
This video is part of the publication Alves-Oliveira, Arriaga, Paiva, and Hoffman (2020). 
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
22 
Chapter 1 presents a general introduction for this thesis, explaining the interdisciplinary 
nature of this work and framing the contributions accordingly. 
Chapter 2 introduces the theoretical underpinnings relevant to this thesis. We address 
key concepts from the field of HRI, such as the notion of what is a social robot and what research 
efforts have been developed for the inclusion of robots as research tools. Secondly, we clarify 
notions from the field of Design Research that grounded this work, namely concepts related to 
User-Centered Design (UCD), Participatory Design (PD), and the role of children when 
designing technologies. Thirdly, we provide literature on creativity research, including variables 
associated with creativity and different methods to measure creativity in children derived from 
the field of Psychology. 
Chapter 3 concerns a systematic literature review of interventions for creativity 
dedicated to children. We presented a review of evidence on creativity interventions for children 
from 5-12 years old by systematically reviewing publications from 1950 to 2018. Therefore, this 
review included 68 years of research and provided an additional classification system with 
multiple levels of analysis for characterizing intervention programs, thus expanding the literature 
on this topic.  The collected evidence from this work supported the choice of techniques for 
stimulating creativity within the scope of our work. Specifically, this review informed what 
methods could be used to design a social robot whose interaction modalities with children that 
would raise their creativity levels. 
Chapter 4 reports on our first experimental study aimed at investigating if activities with 
robots promote creativity in children. Towards this goal, we have studied existing activities with 
robots already implemented in schools to understand the potential of using this type of 
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
23 
Figure 2. Roadmap for the present thesis’ chapters. 
 
interactive technology for creativity stimulation. We have chosen schools that include Science, 
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics programs (STEM) and within these, we chose 
activities in which children either code or design a robot. This study demonstrated that activities 
with robots, with special emphasis on coding robots, promote the creative potential of children.  
Chapter 5 includes a description of the social robot that was designed, fabricated, and 
developed during this PhD. This chapter presents studies with children conducted in schools and 
museums for children. Taking into account methods and practices from Design Research, we 
included children at all design stages, resulting in children having an active role in the design of 
the robot. Additionally, concepts from Mechanical Engineering, Computer Science, and Robotics 
were learned throughout this the time of this thesis to enable the development of this robot. 
Instead of using off-the-shelf robotic platforms, we proposed to design our robot tailored for the 
specific purpose of stimulating creativity in children. 
Chapter 6 presents the final experimental study in which the developed social robot was 
tested in the context of summer camps. During this study, children interacted with the social 
robot by creating a story and using it as an active character. We considered different comparison  
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
24 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Research space of the current thesis. 
 
groups that triggered different interaction dynamics between children and the robot. 
Chapter 7 provides a discussion and conclusion for this thesis in which finding from the 
different studies are summarized and integrated in the state of the art. We conclude this thesis 
with a reflection for future research in child-robot interactions for creativity, combing the results 
from the studies with the interdisciplinary nature of this work. 
Studying Social Robotics with a Psychology Lens 
 
Nowadays, technology is everywhere. It has reached a maturity level that enables us to 
contact, connect, establish, and maintain relationships at a distance or even just to serve as an 
additional communication modality (Brey, 2018). Until a few years ago, the role of robotics has 
been mainly tailored to the manufacturing, corporative, or military sectors. These areas benefited 
from technology to provide societal advancement and economic growth (Ramesh, & Devadasan, 
2007). Nowadays, technology costs have lowered and made accessible to most populations. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
25 
Additionally, the Maker Movement has made innovations within the scope of robotics and small 
gadgets open to everyone, especially within the field of education (Dougherty, 2012, 2013; 
Halverson, & Sheridan, 2014; Martin, 2015; Peppler, & Bender, 2013). 
Together with the technological advances, robotics applications have been extended 
beyond their traditional role in manufacturing and industry, to coexist with humans in their daily 
life (Campa, 2016; Šabanović, 2010; Salvini, Laschi, & Dario, 2010). Social robots, or robots 
with the capability of perceiving and interacting with humans, have been included as part of the 
household (Cakmak, & Takayama, 2013), in education (Belpaeme, Kennedy, Ramachandran, 
Scassellati, & Tanaka, 2018; Mubin, Stevens, Shahid, Al Mahmud, & Dong, 2013; Toh et al., 
2016), as a social assistive technology for the elderly (Broekens, Heerink, & Rosendal, 2009; 
Mordoch, Osterreicher, Guse, Roger, & Thompson, 2013) and in the context of autism spectrum 
disorder (Diehl, Schmitt, Villano, & Crowell, 2012; Pennisi,  et al., 2016), to mention a few.  
A unique aspect of social robotic technology is the evocative power of social interaction 
that comes with a physical coexistence of robots. This qualifies robots as tools for investigation 
in many fields. For example, designers and artists have been interested in investigating aesthetics 
of robots and their application in art settings (e.g., Moura, 2007), engineers use robots as testbeds 
for algorithms that are envisioned to go beyond simulation and become real-world applications 
(e.g., Bhattacharjee, Cabrera, Caspi, Cakmak, & Srinivasa, 2019), and social scientists use robots 
as reliable platforms capable of replication the same movements for testing theories or exploring 
new research endeavors to then inform the field of psychology itself (e.g., Cangelosi, & 
Schlesinger, 2018). In particular, Psychology is a field of research with solid foundations that 
can support the advancement of the field of HRI, which is a newer field, while at the same time 
benefiting from it. For example, HRI heavily relies on developed questionnaires and scales from 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
26 
Psychology that are adapted to fit an intervention with a robot. However, most of the time, the 
scales are informally adapted and lack proper validation processes. In this sense, Psychology can 
provide important contributes to the validation of metrics specially developed and validated for 
the field of HRI. Additionally, because robots are such reliable platforms, they can be used by 
psychologists to replicate paradigms and used widely between cultures and even between 
laboratories and universities.  
The present thesis views robots primarily from the latter perspective. Therefore, we relied 
on social robots as a research tool to study novel ways to investigate human creativity. At the 
same time, we grounded our research in psychological theories, methods, and experimental 
designs. To achieve our goal, we also delved into other research fields to gain knowledge on 
robot design, fabrication, and programming. As a result, the contributions of this thesis extend 
beyond the field of Psychology and have the potential to inform the field of Design by providing 
information about how to design robots for creativity interventions. Additionally, this thesis can 
contribute to the field of HRI and Robotics by enriching the applications for which robots are 
being developed for. See Figure 3 for a visual representation of the research space that this thesis 
encompassed. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
27 
Chapter 2. Theoretical Underpinnings 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This chapter was based on the following papers: 
*Baraka, K., *Alves-Oliveira, P., & Ribeiro, T. (2020). An extended framework for 
characterizing social robots. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.09873. (Chapter submitted and 
accepted to the Evaluation Methods Standardization in Human-Robot Interaction Book, 
Springer. In press). 
Giger, J. C., Piçarra, N., Alves‐Oliveira, P., Oliveira, R., & Arriaga, P. (2019). Humanization of 
robots: Is it really such a good idea? Human Behavior and Emerging Technologies, 1(2), 
111-123. 
Paiva, A., Mascarenhas, S., Petisca, S., Correia, F., & Alves-Oliveira, P. (2018). Towards more 
humane machines: Creating emotional social robots. In New interdisciplinary landscapes 
in morality and emotion (pp. 125-139). Routledge. 
*Both authors contributed equally to the paper.
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
28 
Abstract 
We provide a broad-ranging overview of the main relevant topics of this work. Firstly, we detail 
on aspects related to the field of Human-Robot Interaction and characterize several relevant 
dimensions that are important when discussing social robots. The dimensions we discussed are: 
social robots’ appearance, social capabilities, purpose and application area, relational role 
between humans and robots, and the difference between autonomy and intelligence. Secondly, 
we detail the design space of technologies that are developed to impact human creativity. 
Specifically, we provide an overview of user-centered design practices, including participatory 
design with children, and present research efforts on the design of social robots aimed at 
promoting human creativity. Thirdly, we provide a theoretical overview of the field of creativity 
research, as creativity is the core concept of this thesis. Specifically, we discuss several existing 
definitions for the term “creativity” and elaborate on how creativity is framed within this thesis. 
In addition, we provide an overview of how creativity skills change according to human 
developmental stages. Finally, we elaborate on the different measures and methods to assess, 
quantify, and analyze creativity. This Chapter is meant to serve as a resource for researchers, 
designers, and developers within and outside the field of social robotics and creativity. It is 
intended to provide them with the knowledge to better understand and position existing social 
robots and their role in human creativity stimulation.  
Keywords: Social robots, design, creativity 
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
29 
Social Humans and Social Robots 
Humans are inherently social beings, spending a great deal of their time establishing a 
diverse range of social connections. Their social nature is not only demonstrated by their social 
behavior (Homans, 1974), but also possesses a biological basis (Frith, & Frith, 2010). This social 
dimension prompts human beings to involuntarily ascribe social qualities even to non-human 
media, such as technological artifacts, often treating them similarly to how they would treat 
humans or other living beings (Nass, Steuer, & Tauber, 1994). This disposition stems from the 
general human tendency of ascribing human-like qualities to non-human entities, called 
“anthropomorphism”, which has been observed and demonstrated in several contexts (Epley, 
Waytz, & Cacioppo, 2007). These phenomena, therefore, place technologies capable of social 
interactions with humans as unique technological innovations. In particular, social robots, i.e., 
robots deliberately designed to interact with humans socially, open up a new paradigm for 
humans to communicate, interact, and relate to robotic technologies. 
The integration of a social dimension in the design of robots has generally been following 
two approaches. First, existing robotic technologies are being enhanced with social capabilities 
for more fluid interactions with humans. Second, social robots are being developed for new 
application areas where the social dimension is central, and beyond a mere interface. Social 
robots offer a spectrum of interactions that is being continuously enriched by researchers from a 
variety of disciplines. The field of HRI, as an expanding field of research, reflects this 
observation. 
HRI is a multidisciplinary field bringing together researchers from an eclectic set of 
disciplines, including robotics, computer science, engineering, artificial intelligence, machine 
learning, human-computer interaction, design, art, animation, cognitive science, psychology,  
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
30 
 
Figure 4. Visual summary of the seven dimensions of the Extended Classification Framework, 
positioned in relation to the robot, the interaction, the context, and the human that are present 
during a human-robot social interaction (Baraka, Alves-Oliveira, & Ribeiro, 2020). 
 
sociology, ethology, and anthropology (Alves-Oliveira, Küster, Kappas, & Paiva, 2016; Baxter, 
Kennedy, Senft, Lemaignan, & Belpaeme, 2016; Eyssel, 2017; Fong, Nourbakhsh, & 
Dautenhahn, 2003; Irfan et al., 2018; Murphy, Nomura, Billard, & Burke, 2010). The 
multidisciplinary inherent to this field of research provides contributions and advancements 
nurtured by scholars from different backgrounds in the conception, design, and implementation 
of social robots. In addition to development, HRI aims to evaluate how well such robots perform 
or serve the purpose they were designed for, being concerned with proper evaluation, testing, and 
refinement of these technologies. The result is a rich multidisciplinary effort to create engaging 
robots that can sustain personalized interactions with humans, adapt to the task at hand and the 
interaction flow, but also understand and model aspects about humans, such as affect and 
cognition (Ho, Dautenhahn, Lim, & Du Casse, 2010; Leite, Martinho, & Paiva, 2013). 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
31 
The Extended Classification Framework proposed by Baraka, Alves-Oliveira, and 
Ribeiro (2020) provides a holistic understanding about the state of the art in HRI, while aiming 
at unifying, clarifying, and extending key concepts to be considered in the design of social 
robots. Specifically, this framework comprises several dimensions identified to be of major 
relevance to the design of social robots. Some of these dimensions relate to the robot itself, 
namely appearance, social capabilities, and autonomy/intelligence, others relate to the 
interaction, namely proximity and temporal profile, and the remaining ones relate to the context, 
namely robot’s relational role and purpose/application area (see Figure 4). In the context of this 
thesis, we focused our work mainly in the appearance of the robot as it was designed and 
fabricated by us, instead of using off-the-shelf robotic planforms. We also dedicated attention to 
its social capabilities, as we have programmed the robot according to the creativity techniques 
and social behaviors desired for its application context of creativity stimulation. Additionally, 
our robot acted autonomously and was not remotely controlled, and its purpose/application area 
was well-established from the beginning of this research, which concerned primarily concerned 
using it as a tool for creativity research training.  
Social Robot Appearance 
The mere physical presence of robots in a shared time and space with humans sparks 
crucial aspects of a social interaction. Indeed, embodiment, a term used to refer to the idea that 
“intelligence cannot merely exist in the form of an abstract algorithm but requires a physical 
instantiation, a body” (Pfeifer, & Scheier, 2001) plays an important role in the perception and 
experience of interacting with intelligent technology. Indeed, literature supports that physical 
embodiment influences the interaction between humans and robots (Fasola, & Mataric, 2011; 
Kennedy, Baxter, & Belpaeme, 2015; Lee, Jung, Kim, & Kim, 2006; Li, 2015; Mumm, & Mutlu, 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
32 
2011; Powers, Kiesler, Fussell, & Torrey, 2007; Wainer, Feil-Seifer, Shell, & Mataric, 2007). In 
particular, the physical appearance of a robot per se, was shown to have a strong influence on 
people regarding aspects like perception, expectations, trust, engagement, motivation and 
usability (Jordan, 1998; DiSalvo, & Gemperle, 2003; Breazeal, 2004). 
Several taxonomies were developed to create representative classifications for a robot’s 
appearance. To cite a few, Shibata (2004) classified robots as being human type, familiar animal 
type, unfamiliar animal type, or imaginary animals / new character type. Additionally, Fong, 
Nourbakhsh, and Dautenhahn (2003) considered anthropomorphic, zoomorphic, caricatured, and 
functional categories. The amount of classifications presented in the literature urges for a unified 
and broad classification for social robot appearances. Building upon the existing classifications, 
this Extended Classification Framework introduces a broad classification that encompasses main 
categories described by other authors, as well as new categories and subcategories. This 
Framework targets only and exclusively a robot’s physical appearance, as distinct from any type 
of robot behavior, i.e., “robot at rest”. 
The robot developed in the scope of this PhD was included in the Taxonomy of Baraka, 
Alves-Oliveira, and Ribeiro (2020), as an imaginary artifact-shaped robot (see Figure 5). The 
robot developed for this thesis is the one on the right side of the “imaginary” ellipse). According 
to Baraka, Alves-Oliveira, and Ribeiro (2020), the category of artifact-inspired robots bears 
robots whose appearance comes from human creations or inventions. They may be inspired by 
objects, such as furniture and everyday objects. They may also be inspired by an existing 
apparatus, demonstrating how existing apparatuses can become robotic systems while 
maintaining the same appearance, such as self-driving cars2, but also everyday apparatuses like a 
 
2 Google self-driving car: https://waymo.com/ 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
33 
toaster, washing machine, etc. Additionally, artifact-shaped robots may be imaginary, i.e., 
translating the invention of the designer, such as the Greeting Machine (Anderson-Bashan et al., 
2018).  
Social Robot Capabilities 
Social robots vary greatly in their social capabilities, i.e., how they can engage in and 
maintain social interactions of varying complexities. As such, researchers have classified and 
defined them according to those social capabilities. Based on the work of Fong, Nourbakhsh, and 
Dautenhahn (2003), the different components of a social robot’s capabilities are as follows: 
• Communicating using natural language or non-verbal modalities - Examples of these 
ways of communication include natural speech (Williams, Thames, Novakoff, & Scheutz, 
2018), motion (Dragan, Lee, & Srinivasa, 2013; Knight, 2011), possibly including gaze 
(Admoni, & Scassellati, 2017), gestures or facial expressions, lights (Baraka, & Veloso, 
2018; Szafir, Mutlu, & Fong, 2015), sounds (Bethel, & Murphy, 2006), or a combination 
of them (Löffler, Schmidt, & Tscharn, 2018). Mavridis (2015) provided a review on 
verbal and non-verbal interactive communication between humans and robots, defining 
different types of existing communications such as interaction grounding, affective 
communications, speech for purpose and planning, among others. 
• Expressing affect and/or perceiving human emotions - Beyond Ekamn’s five basic 
emotions (Ekman, 1992) - anger, disgust, fear, happiness, sadness, and surprise -, this 
may include more complex affective responses such as empathy. For example, Paiva,  
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
34 
 
Figure 5. Summary of robot’s appearance classification. This classification was based on prior 
work from Fong, Nourbakhsh, and Dautenhahn (2003) and Shibata (2004), and was unified, 
extended, elaborated, and clarified in the context of the Extended Framework by Baraka, Alves-
Oliveira, and Ribeiro (2020). 
 
Artifact-shaped
robots
Apparatus-inspired
Imaginary
Object-inspired
Human-inspired robots
Humanoids
Androids
Geminoids
Body parts
Bio-inspired robots
Animal-inspired robots
Real
Imaginary
Familiar
Unfamiliar
Familiar
Unfamiliar
Body parts
Functional 
robots
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
35 
Leite, Boukricha, and Wachsmuth (2017) analyzed different ways by which robots and 
other artificial agents can simulate and trigger empathy in their interactions with humans. 
• Exhibiting distinctive personality and character traits - The major components to be 
considered, according to Robert (2018), are human personality when interacting with a 
robot, robot personality when interacting with humans, dissimilarities or complementary 
in human-robot personalities, and aspects that facilitate robot personality. Some 
companies such as Misty Robotics3 are prioritizing the user personalization of a robot's 
personality as an important feature for future commercial social robots. 
• Modeling and recognizing social aspects of humans - Modeling human agents allows 
for robots to interpret aspects of human behavior or communication and appropriately 
respond to them. Rossi, Ferland, and Tapus, (2017) provide a survey of sample works 
aimed at profiling users according to different types of features. More advanced models 
may have to consider theory of mind approaches (Scassellati, 2002). 
• Learning and developing new social skills and competencies - In addition to being 
programmed to have social skills, social robots may have the ability to refine those skills 
with time through adaptation, or even developing new skills altogether. An active area of 
research that looks at such paradigms is the area of developmental robotics (Lungarella, 
& Metta, 2003). 
• Establishing and maintaining social relationships - Relationships operate over a 
timespan that goes beyond a few interactions. A number of questions arise when one 
considers long-term interactions of robots with humans and what it means for a robot to 
proactively establish and maintain a relationship that is two-sided. Leite, Martinho, and 
 
3 Misty Robotics website: https://www.mistyrobotics.com/ 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
36 
Paiva (2013) established some initial guidelines for the design of social robots for long-
term interaction. These include continuity and incremental robot behaviors (e.g., recalling 
previous activities and self-disclosure), affective interactions and empathy (e.g., 
displaying contextualized affective reactions), and memory and adaptation (e.g., 
identifying new and repeated users). 
In the case of the robot developed during this PhD, it uses non-verbal communication 
modalities of lights with different colors and movements at different speeds to communicate with 
children. The robot can model the play patterns of children thus adapting the interaction and 
behaviors o different play moments. 
Purpose and Application Area of Social Robots 
Usually, the physical characteristics of a technological device (e.g., toaster, microwave, 
typewriter, manufacturing machine) tend to be strongly coupled with its purpose, i.e., the task it 
was designed to achieve. With the advent of personal computers and smartphones, we moved 
away from defining those devices solely by their purpose. For instance, it would be inappropriate 
to call a modern computer an “electronic typewriter” or even a smartphone an “electronic 
phone”, because those devices can serve an immense variety of uses, thanks to software 
applications that constantly create new purposes for them. Similarly, even though some robots 
may currently be designed for a specific purpose in mind, some robots may possess a set of skills 
that can prove useful in a variety of scenarios, sometimes across completely different application 
areas. As a result, (1) many different robots can be programmed to be used for the same purpose, 
but also (2) a single robot can be used for many different purposes. For example, a robot such as 
NAO4 has been used across a large variety of purposes, both in research and industry, from 
 
4NAO robot from SoftBank Robotics: https://www.softbankrobotics.com/emea/en/nao 
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
37 
playing soccer (Graf, Härtl, Röfer, & Laue, 2009) to assisting individuals with cognitive 
impairments (Shamsuddin et al., 2012) or teaching children (Alves-Oliveira, Sequeira, Melo, 
Castellano, & Paiva, 2019). 
According to Baraka, Alves-Oliveira, and Ribeiro (2020), the main application areas for 
social robots are healthcare and therapy; industry; education, entertainment and the arts; home 
and workplace; search and rescue; public service; and social sciences. In the scope of this PhD 
thesis, we used a social robot for two main application areas: education and social sciences. 
Robots in education are mainly used with children because they can increase engagement 
in learning while favoring an interactive and playful component, which may be lacking in a 
traditional classroom setting (Kanda, Sato, Saiwaki, & Ishiguro, 2007; Tanaka, Cicourel, & 
Movellan, 2007). There is a number of formats that educational scenarios can take, where the 
robot has a different role. Beyond being a teacher delivering material, the robot can also act as a 
social mediator between children, encouraging dyadic, triadic, and group interactions (Kozima, 
Michalowski, & Nakagawa, 2009). Moreover, the robot may play the role of a learner in 
learning-by-teaching scenarios, in which the child teaches the robot and, in this process, develops 
their own skills (Jacq, Lemaignan, Garcia, Dillenbourg, & Paiva, 2016). In the case of our work, 
our robot acts as a toy for children and can be used in schools, summer camps, and children’s 
playgrounds. Therefore, despite not having the purpose of directly impacting learning content 
and generating learning gains in children, the robot has the purpose of empowering creative 
abilities that are beneficial to other contexts of learning as a transferable skill. 
In our work, we also used the robot for social sciences. Due to the possibility of 
programming robots to exhibit mechanisms of cognition similar to those of humans, a less-
publicized purpose of robots is in fields of the social sciences for the study of social 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
38 
development, social interaction, emotion, attachment, and personality (Fong, Nourbakhsh, & 
Dautenhahn, 2003). The idea is to use robots as test subjects in controlled laboratory 
experiments, leveraging the fact that such robots can reproduce consistent behaviors repeatedly 
and can be controlled to test predictions of human models of cognition. For example, the Cog 
robot (Scassellati, 2003) was used to investigate models of human social cognition. Similarly, a 
doll-like robot, Robota (Billard, Robins, Nadel, & Dautenhahn, 2007) was used in comparative 
studies for social development theories (Dautenhahn, & Billard, 1999). Additionally, robots 
(human-inspired or other types) can be used as stimuli to elicit behaviors from humans for the 
development and refinement of theories about human behavior and cognition. For a more 
detailed discussion on cognitive robotics and its applications outside of technology-related fields, 
consult Lungarella, Metta, Pfeifer, and Sandini, (2003). Our robot was used mainly as a tool in 
psychology research. By being programmed with the same creative technique, the interactions 
with children across the different groups varied according to code programmed in the robot, thus 
making it a perfect platform for the social sciences. Additionally, we have released the hardware 
(Alves-Oliveira, Arriaga, Paiva, & Hoffman, 2019) and software (Alves-Oliveira, et al., 2020) of 
this robot in open-access publications, making it an accessible tool in research. 
Relational Role Between Humans and Robots 
One of the relevant dimensions that shape human-robot interaction is the role that the 
robot is designed to fulfill. The concept of role is an abstract one, for which various different 
perspectives can be presented.  We specifically looked at the relational role of the robot towards 
the human. This is the role that a robot is designed to fulfill within an interaction, and is not 
necessarily tied to an application area. The relational role the robot has been designed to have is 
critical to the perception, or even the relationship, that arises between robot and human. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
39 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Classification of relational roles of robots towards humans (represented as the “you”) 
by Baraka, Alves-Oliveira, and Ribeiro (2020). 
 
Towards clarifying the concept of relational role, it is important to distinguish relational role 
from role in an activity or application. In a specific activity or application, we may expect to find 
activity-specific roles (as in role-playing), such as teacher, driver, game companion, cook, or 
therapist. These types of roles are defined by the type of activity performed between the robot 
and humans, therefore making it an open-ended list that is likely to stay in constant evolution, as 
robots become applied to new fields and tasks. Given the fuzziness of this concept in the HRI 
field, there have not been many attempts at generalizing the concept of role of robots within and 
in relation to humans. Therefore, Baraka, Alves-Oliveira, and Ribeiro (2020) attempted to gather 
previous literature on robot roles towards humans (Breazeal, 2004b; Goodrich, & Schultz, 2008; 
Norman, 1986; Scholtz, 2003) and provided a visual classification for these roles (see Figure 6). 
This classification system does not necessarily add or propose new roles, but instead, redefined 
them from a relational perspective, placing emphasis on how the robot relates from a human’s 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
40 
perspective. As such, Baraka, Alves-Oliveira, and Ribeiro (2020) considered the following roles 
that a robot may have towards you (the human): 
• A robot “for you” serves some utility on a given task. This is the most traditional role of 
a tool or a servant and is inspired by most previous classifications (e.g., Dautenhahn, 
2005).  Despite closely related to the concept of a tool, this role is framed as a broader 
type of robotic tool, which can even include robots like autonomous cars. 
• A robot “as you” plays the role of a proxy, namely, but not limited to, telepresence. 
However, it does not necessarily imply interaction from far away as in Breazeal’s 
(2004b) classification. This type of role can exist even when inter-actors are co-located, 
as long as the robot is acting in place of another person who operates it (e.g., shared 
autonomy scenarios). 
• A robot “with you” is typically collaborative, with various levels of autonomy, including 
being part of a group with you. It is used in applications in which both the human and the 
robot act together, as a team, or towards common goals, and also includes robots for 
companionship. The robot and the human are not necessarily co-located, such as for 
example human-robot teams that have to communicate remotely. 
• A robot “as if you” emulates particular social or psychological traits found in humans. 
These robots are mainly used as social sciences research tools in which, e.g., a human can 
control remotely control a robot without the participant being aware to investigate the 
effects of interacting with robots. This method is called the Wizard-of-Oz (WoZ) and is 
commonly used for research contexts in which the development of an autonomous 
version of the interaction is still not attainable or requires too much time to develop 
considering the research timeline (Steinfeld, Jenkins, & Scassellati, 2009; Riek, 2012). 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
41 
To date, robots have been used to examine, validate and refine theories of social and 
biological development, psychology, neurobiology, emotional and non-verbal 
communication, and social interaction. 
• A robot “around you”, shares a physical space and common resources with the human. 
It differs from a “robot with you” by the fact that it is necessarily co-located with the 
human, but not necessarily collaborating with them. These are typically called co-
operating, co-present, or bystanders, as previously proposed in Scholzt’s (2003) 
classification. 
• A robot “as part of you” extends the human body’s capabilities. These robots typically 
have nonexistent or very limited autonomy but provide humans with physical capabilities 
that they could not otherwise perform using their own biological bodies. Such robots can 
be used for pure embodiment extension (e.g., strength-enhancing exoskeletons), or for 
close-range HRI collaboration, such as the robotic wearable forearm (Vatsal, & Hoffman, 
2018) whose function is to serve as a supernumerary third arm for shared workspace 
activities. 
The list of relational roles presented defines non-exclusive roles, meaning that for some 
particular applications, we may design and develop robots that take more than one of these roles, 
or take a different role when more than one human is involved in the interaction. An example 
would be of a robot used in an office, which can be used “for the users” to deliver mail and 
packages to different locations, while at the same time acting “around the users” when 
navigating the office space. In the context of this thesis, the proposed robot was under two 
different roles taking into account the viewpoint of the researchers (i.e., us) and of the children 
(i.e., as study participants). Therefore, the robot was designed “for you” as it acted as a tool “for 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
42 
the research” to use with the specific purpose of a creativity intervention context. At the same 
time, the robot was designed “with you” as the nature of the task between children and the robot 
consists of a collaborative storytelling activity. In this sense, the robot and the children 
participant collaborate on the creation of a story. 
Robot Autonomy and Intelligence 
The concepts of autonomy and intelligence are hard to define, and there does not seem to 
be unique accepted definitions (Beer, Fisk, & Rogers, 2014). In particular, existing definitions in 
the literature seem to differ depending on the context of application, and the main field of focus 
of the author(s). When considering social robots, concepts of autonomy and intelligence arise 
and become necessary aspects to consider when characterizing the behavior of robots. Although 
related, these are two distinct concepts that are often inconsistently and confusingly used in 
existing literature (Gardner, Kornhaber, & Wake,1996; Gunderson, & Gunderson, 2004). In 
particular, it is often assumed that a high level of robot autonomy implies both a high level of 
intelligence and of complexity. In reality, some fully autonomous systems can possess very low 
intelligence (e.g., a traditional manufacturing machine) or complexity (e.g., a simple self-
operated mechanism). A better clarification of the concepts of autonomy and intelligence, and 
their relation, is needed, especially in the context of social robotics. 
It may seem somewhat paradoxical to talk about autonomy in the context of interactive 
robots, because traditionally fully autonomous robots are involved in minimal interactions with 
humans; in other words, reduced interaction with humans is a by-product of increased robot 
autonomy. For social robots however, this relation between the amount of human interaction and 
robot autonomy is questioned. Highly autonomous social robots are expected to carry out more 
fluid, natural, and complex interactions, which does not make them any less autonomous. There 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
43 
exists a very large number of definitions of autonomy for general agents, however central to 
most existing definitions is the amount of control the robot has over performing the task(s) it was 
designed to fulfill (or that it sets to itself), as emphasized by Beer, Fisk, and Rogers, (2014). For 
social robots, tasks may include well-defined goal states (e.g., assembling furniture) or more 
elusive ones (e.g., engaging in conversation). 
The concept of autonomy should also account for learning (Baraka, Alves-Oliveira, and 
Ribeiro, 2020. Indeed, many learning paradigms include human-in-the-loop approaches, such as 
active learning (Chao, Cakmak, & Thomaz, 2010) learning by demonstration (Rybski, Yoon, 
Stolarz, & Veloso, 2007), and corrective human feedback learning (Meriçli, Veloso, & Akın, 
2011), used within the context of interactions in applications involving human teachers such as 
learning-by-teaching educational scenarios (Jacq, Lemaignan, Garcia, Dillenbourg, & Paiva, 
2016) or general collaborative scenarios (Breazeal, Hoffman, & Lockerd, 2004). 
As a result, Baraka, Alves-Oliveira, and Ribeiro (2020) extended the definition from 
Beer, Fisk, and Rogers, (2014) to make it applicable to social robots, and defined autonomy of a 
social robot as “The extent to which a robot can operate in the tasks it was designed for (or that 
it creates for itself) without external intervention.” The same authors extended the definition 
proposed initially by Gunderson, & Gunderson (2004) to be applicable to social robots and 
defined intelligence as “The ability to determine behavior that will maximize the likelihood of 
goal satisfaction under dynamic and uncertain conditions, linked to the environment and the 
interaction with other (possibly human) agents.” 
Additionally, the design of social robots is that a robot’s perceived intelligence (Bartneck, 
Kulić, Croft, & Zoghbi, 2009) can be drastically different from its actual intelligence, which 
leads us to ways of measuring autonomy and intelligence. Both autonomy and intelligence can 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
44 
be seen as belonging to a continuum, taking into account aspects of robot perception, cognition, 
execution, and learning (Gunderson, & Gunderson, 2004; Yanco, & Drury, 2004). As a result, 
autonomy is a dimension that one designs for, constrained by possible achievable levels of 
intelligence. As a general rule, the higher the autonomy and intelligence is, the higher the 
complexity of the system is. 
For a highly heterogeneous technology such as a social robot that involves a combination 
of hardware, software architecture, cognition mechanisms, intelligent hardware control, just to 
name a few, it is important to define dimensions about aspects such as autonomy and 
intelligence. The overall assessment of these aspects would then depend on a combination of 
assessments over individual dimensions. Researchers at IBM have proposed to define 
“dimensions of (general artificial) intelligence”, as a way to define an updated version of the 
Turing test (Turing, 2009). Their list is more task-oriented but can serve as a basis to think about 
general dimensions for both intelligence and autonomy. Based on Baraka, Alves-Oliveira, and 
Ribeiro (20202) work, the following dimensions of intelligence and autonomy are defined: 
perception of environment-related and human-related factors, modeling of environment and 
human(s), planning actions to interact with environment and human(s), executing plans under 
physical and social constraints, and learning through interaction with the environment or 
humans. 
The dimensions above span most existing building blocks for the intelligence of a social 
robot. However, depending on their implementation and complexity, some robots may not 
include one or more of the above dimensions. Those dimensions are generally separated in the 
design and implementation of most robots, hence as a result, intelligence and autonomy on each 
dimension may be completely different. As technology advances, higher amounts of robot 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
45 
intelligence will be achievable, unlocking new possible levels of autonomy for more complex 
tasks; however, the amount of autonomy of a system (within possible technological limits) will 
remain a design choice.  
Our robot was designed considering the dimension of planning actions to interact with 
environment and humans in terms of its intelligence/autonomy as within this dimension the 
decision-making of a robot is reduced to creating plans for robot actions that take into account 
the shape of the task, the goal, and the current state of the world, including the robot, the 
environment, and the human(s). Indeed, our robot collected only patterns from the play motions 
of children to plan its next behavior. No personal data from the children themselves (e.g., facial 
expressions) is collected. This was a deliberate design decision to protect children’s privacy.  
Social Robot Design Space 
The actual design process of social robots, which includes a robot’s physical shape and 
its behavior, has benefited from several design approaches inspired by design practices from a 
variety of fields such as engineering, computer science, Human-Computer Interaction (HCI), 
design research, and human factors. For example, design patterns can be reused without having 
to start from scratch every time a robot is designed (Kahn et al., 2008). There generally exist 
three broad design approaches, each of which may be valid depending on the intended context 
and objectives. For this thesis, we will be focusing on user-centered design approaches with 
special emphasis on participatory design. 
User-centered design. UCD’s central paradigms concerns the involvement of the 
intended user population as part of most development stages, including identifying needs and 
requirements, brainstorming, conceptualizing, creating solutions, testing, and refining prototypes 
through an iterative design process (Abras, Maloney-Krichmar, & Preece, 2004; Norman, 2013). 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
46 
In the HRI context, the main assumption is that humans have their own communication 
mechanisms and unconsciously expect robots to follow human social communication modalities, 
rules, conventions and protocols. From an evaluation point of view, UCD relies strongly on 
subjective self-reports of users to measure their perceptions and complement more objective 
measures such as task performance. Additionally, UCD grounds most of the intermediate design 
evaluations on Formative research, a research methodology that is used to guides an entire 
design process and has the benefit of allowing for ongoing intermediate assessments to improve 
current systems (Van den Akker, 1999; Van den Akker, Gravemeijer, McKenney, & Nieveen, 
2006). 
By including users in the design process, UCD reflects a methodology that supports 
designers to be sensitive to their unexamined biases, directly within the technology design 
processes. Examples of these methodologies are reflective design in which the reflection on 
unconscious values is the core principle of technology design (Sengers, Boehner, David, & 
Kaye, 2005), value-sensitive design in which the design of any technological artifact accounts for 
human values in a principled and comprehensive way (Friedman, 1996; Friedman, & Hendry, 
2019), participatory design in which stakeholders of the technology are actively involved in the 
design process to help ensure the result meets their needs and that the technology is usable and 
will be accepted (Björgvinsson, & Hillgren, 2010; Nesset, & Large, 2004). These critical design 
approaches explore technology designs as a way to engender positive social changes for various 
issues and its core idea is to empower users by giving them a voice in the design of products that 
are meant to be used by them. In our work, we used a participatory design approach with  
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
47 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7. The six roles that children might have in the design of new technologies according to 
Druin (2002), Van Doorn (2016), and Iversen, Smith, and Dindler (2017).  
 
children as a way to include them at the core of the design process of the robot’s appearance and 
behaviors. 
Participatory design with children. Children can acquire different roles when included 
in participatory design research (Landoni, Rubegni, Nicol, & Read, 2016). Druin (2002) was the 
first author to define the different roles that children can have when they are included in the 
design of technologies, postulating that children can act as users, testers, informants, and design 
partners. Later on, Van Doorn (2016) added the role of children as co-researchers, and Iversen, 
Smith, and Dindler (2017) extended this classification to add children as protagonists. We 
further describe these roles below and visually represented them in Figure 7. 
• Children as users - With this role, children use technology and researchers conduct 
behavioral observation about this usage. At this stage, the technology is not being 
developed and changed anymore; instead, it has already been developed and it is being 
distributed for commercial or research purposes. The methods used are mostly 
observational (using video recordings or in situ) or testing children before/after using the 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
48 
technology (e.g., by using child-friendly toolkits (Read, 2008)). If in higher 
developmental stages, children’s impressions can also be collected via interviews and 
qualitative surveys. 
• Children as testers - With this role, prototypes of future technological artifacts are tested 
with children before any commercial release. The intention is to collect information about 
the usability, utility, and experiential qualities of the proposed technology. The methods 
used are based on observation and directed interaction (Van Kesteren, Bekker, 
Vermeeren, & Lloyd, 2003). When acting as testers, children help to shape the 
technology, however, have no involvement during the design stages; 
• Children as informants - With this role, children play a part in the design process before 
the process starts. Researchers gain insights to inform the design at various stages of the 
design process by eliciting and including children’s expert knowledge. Direct 
observation, sketching, and story- or comic-boarding are used to elicit graphic 
visualizations to illustrate an interaction scenario (Hart, 2008). Children can be invited to 
draw or have an adult drawing their ideas for them (Moraveji, Li, Ding, O'Kelley, & 
Woolf, 2007); 
• Children as partners - With this role, children are equal stakeholders during the design 
process. Cooperative inquiry (Abbas, Tootell, Freeman, & Ellmers, 2018) co-design 
(Melonio & Gennari, 2012), and other methods, are used during workshop activities and 
design sessions. As design partners, children have an enormous impact on the design and 
development of technologies. It is through the empowerment of children by giving them a 
voice in design that meaningful technologies are developed;  
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
49 
• Children as co-researchers – With this role, children share, gather, and analyze data 
from their practice during technology usage. Together, researchers and children gain 
contextual knowledge by jointly studying children’s practices. This process can become 
detached from design work, since the emphasis here is on knowledge production over 
design information. Methods involved are interviews (Poole & Lamb, 1998) and thinking 
aloud techniques (Als, Jensen, & Skov, 2005; Donker, & Reitsma, 2004); 
• Children as protagonists – With this role, children carry out a complete design process 
in which process and product reflection is a central component. The goal is to encourage 
children to be the main agents in leading the design process and thereby to develop skills 
to design and reflect on technology and its role in their life. The stances that children 
develop during the design process are reflective of their options towards technology in 
their lives, also reflecting political environments of development. Methods used vary 
from prototyping (Walsh et al., 2020), to ideation and field studies (Iversen, Smith, & 
Dindler, 2017). 
In our work, children were involved under different roles when designing the robot for 
creativity, depending on the design stage. Children took the role of design partners in the early 
stages of the robot conception and design, as informants and testers during design improvements, 
and as users when acting as participants in the validation study of the creativity intervention. 
These roles and their relation to the design of the robot are further detailed in Chapter 4. We 
would like to note that the sample pool of children involved in the different design stages under 
different roles is unrelated.  
 
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
50 
The Role of Technology in Promoting Human Creativity 
Technology appears as promising in the field of creativity (Frich, MacDonald 
Vermeulen, Remy, Biskjaer, & Dalsgaard, 2019). Lubart (2005), envisions computers promoting 
creativity in different ways and has defined fours possible future roles for computers in the field 
of creativity, described below: 
• Computer as nanny - Computers encourage creativity by monitoring the working 
process and supporting the potentially creative person according to the progress made. 
• Computer as pen-pal - Computers facilitate the exchange of creative ideas between 
diverse people by integrating and represent them in a physical space. 
• Computer as coach - Computers can support the creative process by providing 
information in different ways to foster idea generation, serving as analogs to jump-start 
the creative process. 
• Computer as colleague - Computers work in a real partnership in the creative process 
with humans, being this the most ambitious vision for human-computer interaction. 
Although the aforementioned taxonomy was created considering computers, we found it 
extremely useful to frame the scope of our creativity intervention in which the robot created was 
used as a coach since it was used as a character for the story that actively provides triggers for 
new storylines through the interaction with children. 
Creativity-Flavored Technologies 
We now present a brief review of previous work on how technology has been used in the 
context of creativity. Generally, we found there are two main areas related to technology and 
creativity. The first idea concerns the development of technologies that mimic or emulate human 
creativity and that can be considered creative on their own. We named this approach as 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
51 
technologies with creativity. The second idea concerns the development of technologies, 
including robots, to serve as tools to stimulate creativity in humans, without necessarily being 
creative. We named this approach as technologies for creativity. We revise both approaches 
below to situate our work. 
Technologies with creativity. These types of technologies are expected to engage in 
creative processes. For example, Simon Colton’s software, called The Painting Fool, creates 
paintings by extracting regions of color in images, abstracting these regions and then altering 
them, changing their color, painting style and type of fill. Adding to this process, the software 
uses imaginative behavior, including the creation of objects and elements (Colton, 2012) and 
picks the rendering of the painting style autonomously, having created paintings with styles 
difficult for people to achieve, thus strengthening The Painting Fool mark in this artistic medium 
(Colton et al., 2015). Furthermore, Google created a computer vision program called DeepDream 
which uses a convolution neural network to find and enhance patterns in images, thus creating a 
dream-like hallucinogenic appearance in the deliberately over-processed images (Mordvintsev, 
Olah, & Tyka, 2015a,b). Additionally, algorithms have been designed for the automatic 
generation of poetry based on different approaches, such as generative, evolutionary, and case-
based reasoning (Oliveira, 2009). Specifically, poetry-making tools were created for several 
languages, such as PoeTryMe for Portuguese (Oliveira & Cardoso, 2015), ASPERA for Spanish, 
(Gervás, 2011), and I, Poet for Chinese (Yan, 2016). Furthermore, an online platform for anyone 
that wants to test computational poetry can perform a Turing test on the poems by trying to guess 
whether the poem was written by a human or an algorithm5. Another application of technologies 
with creativity includes an algorithm responsible for writing the screenplay for the short sci-fi 
 
5 “Bot or not”, a n online platform for taking Turing tests of poems: http://botpoet.com/ 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
52 
film “Sunspring”. In this case, the algorithm acted as the film Writer6. In the field of music, 
artists such as Brian Eno, an expert in ambient music, created the album “Reflections” that uses 
generative algorithms to create songs. Therefore, when playing the album using a dedicated app, 
the songs suffer changes in their melodies according to the time of the day resulting in an album 
that never repeats entirely its content7. A last example is the “artrobots” created by the artists 
Leonel Moura that paint. A set of small-sized robots that have information about each other, in 
so called-swarm behaviors similar to the behavior of ants and bees, navigate throughout a canvas 
and decide which colors and what abstract patterns to use in the painting according to 
randomness the of positive/negative feedback (Moura, 2007, 2018). 
Technologies with creativity.  These types of technologies are expected to act as tools to 
stimulate human creativity. These types of technologies include both virtual and physical agents. 
In a virtual context, an agent named Sam was developed to collaboratively support children in 
storytelling (Ryokai, Vaucelle, & Cassell, 2003). This peer-like agent adapted to the children’s 
cognitive skills for storytelling, enabling them to externalize and explain their thought process to 
improve their communication and literacy skills. Other virtual tools, such as  Scratch, a 
programming language for children (Honey & Kanter, 2013; Resnick et al., 2009; Resnick & 
Robinson, 2017) and coding music for adults have been used to support and enhance their 
creative abilities (Brown & Sorensen, 2009; Collins, McLean, Rohrhuber, & Ward, 2003; 
Magnusson, 2011). In the domain of game design, 3Buddy is a tool that was designed for junior 
level designers to explore the possible creative design space of a level (Lucas & Martinho, 
2017). A mixed virtual-and-reality application platform that uses an interactive character whose 
embodiment transitions from an animated character on-screen to a small mobile robot, enables 
 
6 “Sunspring” film starring Thomas Middleditch: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LY7x2Ihqjmc 
7 “Reflections”, by Brian Eno: http://www.brian-eno.net/ 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
53 
children to engage storytelling, providing opportunities for deeper immersion as they become co-
protagonists of the story (Robert & Breazeal, 2012). 
Towards physical contexts, robots have also been used to stimulate creativity in humans. 
A social robot acted as a collaborator in a task where participants had to generate creative ideas 
for a Zen Rock Garden. The results from this study showed that participants engaged in the 
creativity task for longer periods and provided almost twice the number of creative expressions 
in the robot condition compared to the PowerPoint condition (Kahn Jr et al., 2016). While this 
task was performed with an adult population, additional some studies were conducted with 
children. Therefore, a study suggested that curiosity, an important creative trait, can be 
stimulated when children interact with a curious robot, compared to the interaction with a non-
curious robot and a tablet (Gordon, Breazeal, & Engel, 2015). Additionally, a study investigated 
if a robot with a growing mindset, a variable that comprises aspects that relate with creativity 
such as preserverance and grit, estimulates creativity in children. Results have shown that 
interacting with a peer-like robot that displayed a growing mindset, in comparison with a robot 
that displayed a neutral mindset, promoted the same growing mindset in children. This was 
illustrated by children trying harder to solve a challenging task when interacting with the robot 
that displayed a growing mindset (Park, Rosenberg-Kima, Rosenberg, Gordon, & Breazeal, 
2017). A different study investigated if a robot that demonstrates creative behavior can help 
children think creatively. Results showed that when participants interacted with the creative 
robot, in comparison with the non creartive one, generated significantly higher number of ideas 
(Ali, Moroso, & Breazeal, 2019). 
While several technologies have been developed to nurture and potentiate human 
creativity, to the best of our knowledge there is no research on the usage of robots as catalysts of 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
54 
human creativity whose design of the interactive behavior was grounded on psychological 
theories. For this reason, we now revise literature on creativity, including its definitions, 
development, and measurement types. 
Creativity Definition, Development, and Measurement 
Creativity Definition(s) 
Creativity is a multi-faced concept and is now a thriving field of research (Ford & Harris 
III, 1992; Kaufman & Sternberg, 2010; Parkhurst, 1999; Runco & Pritzker, 1999; Sawyer, 2011; 
Sternber, 1988, 1999; Sternberg & Kaufman, 2018a; Taylor, 1988). The definition of creativity 
has changed over time contributing to a field of research with a rich but sometimes problematic 
terminology (Sternberg, 1999). 
It is important to recognize that the concept of creativity has its own history. In ancient 
Greece, creativity was associated with mysticism and inspiration attributed to non-rational 
sources, such as muses or spirits (Lubart, Mouchiroud, Tordjman, & Zenasn, 2015). As a 
counterpoint, Aristotle viewed creativity as an ability that finds its source inside the individual 
through mental associations. After the Roman Empire had collapsed and the feudal system 
established, discussions about creativity became an emergent part of societal and philosophical 
debates again. During the Renaissance the role of artists in society shifted to become a primary 
source of creativity. While this undoubtedly benefited society, creativity started being associated 
with the idea that only a few had the skill to be creative, and thus, creativity could not be learned, 
improved, mastered, or enjoyed by others (Albert & Runco, 1999). Nowadays, many authors 
agree not only that this creativity can exist in all humans, and it can be developed and enhanced 
(Baer, 2017; Barbot & Heuser, 2017; Beghetto & Kaufman, 2010; Cropley, 1997; Erat & 
Gneezy, 2016; Fink, et al., 2010; Miller, 2015; Nickerson, 1999; Soh, 2017). It is thereby 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
55 
imperative to encourage the growth of creativity skills from a very young age in schools (Mellou, 
1996). 
 
Researchers still have different viewpoints as to what creativity is (Kampylis & Valtanen, 
2010). The absence of a common definition may be partially responsible for the proliferation of 
alternative theories that can sometimes hold contradictory ideas (Kozbelt, Beghetto, & Runco, 
2010; Lubart, 2001). As such, over 60 definitions of the concept of creativity are present in the 
field of psychology alone (Mayer, 1999; Taylor, 1988). While the earliest definitions of 
creativity described this concept as a function of an individual ability (Guilford, 1967), recent 
definitions view creativity has an interaction of many factors, including the individual and 
environment (Plucker, Beghetto, & Dow, 2004). Taylor (1988) attempted to propose a standard 
definition of creativity (Runco & Laeger, 2012). In another quest to define this concept, authors 
have tried to define what is not creativity (Simonton, 2018). Table 1 summarizes selected 
definitions of creativity according to their theoretical model in a timescale manner. 
Additionally, the terms divergent and convergent thinking have been associated with the 
definition of creativity (Guilford, 1968). While divergent thinking is the process by which 
ideation moves into new and different directions, convergent thinking is involved when ideation 
lean towards conventional ideas. While these definitions imply that these two forms of creative 
thinking are opposites, in reality they operate in a spectrum and are part of a continuum of 
thought processes (Eyseck, 2003). In fact, if a creative idea requires effectiveness and usefulness, 
it needs not only to be original (divergent thinking) but to converge in an actual form 
(convergent thinking). In our work, we follow this theoretical model and view creativity as a 
series of processes that involve both divergent and convergent ways of thinking, and that is 
influenced by variables related with the creative person (e.g., motivation knowledge). 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
56 
Table 8. Summary of selected definitions of creativity in timeline order. Retrieved from Alves-
Oliveira, Xavier, Arriaga, Hoffman, and Paiva (under review). 
 
Author(s) 
Creativity definition 
Wallas (1926) 
Process that encompasses four stages: preparation (investigation of the problem), 
incubation (time until illumination), illumination (insight about the problem) and 
verification (deliberate effort to validate the idea with respect to the problem). 
 
Guilford (1967) 
Embodiment of a thought in the form of an external behavior measured using fluency, 
flexibility, and originality. 
 
Torrance (1988) 
Series of flows, including problem identification, speculation, construction of 
hypothetical assumption, and the sharing of ideas with others. 
 
Amabile (1996) 
Process of idea generation or problem solving as a function of the person's expertise, 
creative-thinking skills, and motivation. 
 
Sternberg and Lubart 
(1996) 
Creative performance occurs in the interaction between intellectual abilities, 
knowledge, thinking styles, personality, motivation, and environment. 
 
Boden (2004) 
Psychological-creativity involves coming up with a surprising idea that is new to the 
person who invented; historical-creativity represents ideas that no one else has had 
before and that had arisen for the first time in human history. 
 
Baer and Kaufman 
(2005) 
Explained by the Amusement Park Theory in which creativity weaves both domain-
general and domain-specific factors. 
 
Kaufman and Beghetto 
(2009); Simonton (2010) 
Explained by the Four C Model of Creativity: mini-c involves any learning 
acquisition; little-c are everyday problem solving and creative expression; Pro-C are 
creative ideas exhibited by professionally expert people in a professional venue; Big-
C occurs when creativity is considered great in the given field. 
 
Csikszentmihalyi 
(1999), Sawyer (2017) 
Group emergence where flow, collaboration, and improvisation processes take place. 
When group synchrony is reached, it becomes difficult to discriminate the individual 
contribution of each person, as “the whole is greater than the individual parts'”. 
 
Cronin and Loewenstein 
(2018) 
Process of following cues to generate insights that change our perspectives, which 
with craft we can use to form inventions and enlightenment. 
 
Creativity Development 
Freud (1959) was the first to propose that childhood is filled with imagination and 
fantasies, attributes of the creative thought, which have the potential to grow into adulthood. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
57 
Piaget (1971) viewed creativity in light of a constructionist approach in which children need to 
pass various developmental stages, usually in a fixed order, for creative growth (Piaget & Cook, 
1952; Piaget, 1959, 1971). Aligned with Piaget’s theory of development Vygotsky (1990, 2004) 
considered “any human act that gives rise to something new is referred to as a creative act”, in 
which learning – including creative acts – is dependent on the interpersonal context of 
development (Vygotsky, 1980). 
Creative growth has different peaks over a lifespan, not being a steady-state or 
consistently increasing (Claxton, Pannells, & Rhoads, 2005; Dacey, 1989; Feldman, 1999; 
Kogan, 1973; Runco & Cayirdag, 2006; Sawyer, et al., 2003; Spodek & Saracho, 2014). One of 
the stages concerns the “creativity crisis” that occurs at the elementary school aged-children 
(Kim, 2011; Raina, 1982; Runco, 1999; Torrance, 1968). The reasons for this crisis are multi-
faceted. Some relate with formal education and conformity rules (e.g., children learn to raising 
hands before speaking, sitting in rows, and following a precise daily schedule) (Gardner & 
Gardner, 2008; Nash, 1974; Runco, Acar, & Cayirdag, 2017; Runco & Cayirdag, 2006; 
Torrance, 1968). Yet, part of this crises is maturational and concerns biological changes, as the 
nervous system may become increasingly sensitive to conventions at this stage, decreasing 
behaviors related with original thinking (Gardner, 1982; Kohlberg, 1966; Runco & Charles, 
1993), accompanied by a decrease in curiosity (Axtell, 1966). Changes can be due to 
developmental transitions related to cognitive sophistication (Piaget, 1950; Smith & Carlsson, 
1983; Vygotsky, 1987; Vygotsky, 1990) and with anxiety present in some stages of 
development, as well as other mental health issues (Smith & Carlsson, 1985). Economic factors, 
such as economic crises, are also perceived to influence the decrease in creativity levels (Gabe, 
Florida, & Mellander, 2012; Sawicki, 2003). But rest assured, research has shown that creativity 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
58 
is a skill that can be trained, nurtured, and stimulated through interventions presenting 
encouraging levels of effectiveness in putting creativity levels up again (Birdi, 2016; Ma, 2009; 
Mansfield, Busse, & Krepelka, 1978; Rose & Lin, 1984; Scott et al., 2004a).  
Creativity Measurement 
Creativity can be evaluated and measures according to four different categories: (a) the 
creative process, by measuring how the creative work is produced; (b) the creative person, by 
measuring the cognitive and personality characteristics of the creator; (c) the creative product, by 
measuring what makes a work great; (d) the press or environment, by measuring the contextual 
factors that facilitate or inhibit creativity expression. This framework is called the Four P’s of 
Creativity and is essential to understand metrics in these four different creativity domains 
(Rhodes, 1961). 
Since the beginning of research in creativity that the question of how to measure this 
ability has been at the forefront of research agendas. However, pitfalls made this task 
challenging, such as the inexistence of validated measures for creativity, or the need for adequate 
standards of assessment. Notwithstanding, much effort in creativity research has been dedicated 
to the improvement of metrics, showing a fast and reliable contribution to this topic (Barbot, & 
Reiter-Palmon, 2019). To ground our work on existing validated interventions for creativity, a 
systematic literature review was conducted as is presented in the next Chapter. 
 
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
59 
Chapter 3. A systematic review of creativity interventions for children 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This chapter is based on the following paper: 
Alves-Oliveira, P., Xavier, C., Arriaga, P., Hoffman, G., & Paiva, A. (second revision). 
Creativity Landscapes: Systematic Review Spanning 68 Years of Creativity Interventions for 
Children. Journal of Creativity Research.
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
60 
Abstract 
Creativity plays a central role in children’s development and well-being, being considered a 
crucial skill to thrive in the personal and professional lives. Given its importance, researchers and 
educators have been highlighting the need to enhance creativity in individuals across the 
lifespan. However, a decline in creative skills around elementary school age has been 
documented. Therefore, there is a need to understand how interventions and programs can 
promote creativity at an early age. The goal of this systematic review is to collect, summarize, 
and present evidence on research about fostering and nurturing creativity in children of 
elementary school age (5-12 years old), by systematically reviewing publications from 1950-
2018, spanning 68 years of research. We additionally contribute to a classification system for 
characterizing creativity research by expanding on existing literature on the topic. This review 
resulted in the characterization of existing trainings that stimulate creativity in children, defined 
according to the different levels of analysis of creativity interventions. We discuss the results 
taking into account possible implications for practice and policymaking in creativity research. 
Keywords: Systematic review, creativity, intervention, program, children 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
61 
Introduction 
Creativity brings joy, wonder, excitement, efficiency, and pleasure into our lives (Baer, 
2017; Kaufman, 2018a). It relates to individual well-being, self-expression, and sense of identity 
(Collard & Looney, 2014; Robinson, 2011). Indeed, we live in a constant drive to find new and 
better ideas for almost every aspect of our professional and personal circles (Amabile, 1989). 
The inherent curiosity (Feldman, 1999), search for newness and exploration (Urban, 1991), are 
constitutional to human behavior, initiating in early childhood and never really wearing off. 
Creativity during childhood is positively associated with adaptation, development, learning, and 
growth (Gardner & Gardner, 2008) and appears to be a predictor of creativity in adulthood 
(Ayman-Nolley, 1992; Russ, 2016). Despite its importance, a tendency for creativity levels to 
drop is reported to occur in the elementary school years. This phenomenon is named “creativity 
crisis” and is defined by a decrease or a gap in creativity levels during developmental stages, 
mostly affecting children in elementary school age and adolescents (Kim, 2011). 
Creativity is a precious good in society (Glaveanu, 2018). Different sectors seek 
individuals with creative abilities, recognizing its functions in improving and healing societal 
problems, from the economy to personal well-being (Moran, 2010). Consequently, economies of 
developed societies are changing. The manufacturing and repetitive work that determined 
industrial markets are now being replaced by services and products whose values are related to 
innovation, communication, collaboration, and new inventions. This is called the creative 
economy era (Burnett & Haydon, 2017; Dubina, Carayannis, & Campbell, 2012; Mellander & 
Florida, 2013; Pink & Unwin, 2005). Much research has been dedicated to harnessing the 
creative potential, such as changes in curriculum content, modifications of teaching approaches, 
and the use of education for empowerment (Davies, 2006). 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
62 
An “upgrade” was proposed to the Bloom’s Taxonomy. It is a widely used taxonomy 
which presents a set of hierarchical models that classify educational goals for student 
performance evaluation (Bloom, 1956). In this upgrade, creativity was included and elevated as 
the most complex of the cognitive processes (Hanna, 2007). Additionally, policy makers are 
highlighting the importance of creativity. For example, according to the New Skills Agenda for 
Europe delivered by the European Commission, creativity was considered one of the Key 
Competences for Lifelong Learning (Cachia, Ferrari, Ala-Mutka, & Punie, 2010; European 
Comission, 2006). Additionally, UNESCO’s Sustainable Developmental Goals highlighted the 
importance of creativity and innovation to empower and promote society and economy 
(UNESCO, 2017). Lastly, the World Economic Forum declared that by 2022 no less than 54% of 
all employees will require significant re- and up-skilling, with creativity in the frontline of these 
skills (World Economic Forum, 2018). 
Theoretical Background 
Given the concern about the decrease in creativity during key-developmental stages, 
several interventions have been developed to nurture and stimulate creativity. Scott et al. (2004a) 
presented a review about the effectiveness of creativity training programs, demonstrating that 
different types of training had value on its own but with varying levels of effectiveness. In this 
sense, idea production and cognitive training proved to be particularly effective compared to 
commonly used training strategies (e.g., imagery). Additionally, Ma (2009) conducted a meta-
analysis to identify the most relevant variables associated with the creative person, the creative 
process, the creative product, and the environment. However, both reviews were general and not 
focusing on children, which limits the understanding of the type of interventions for creativity 
targeting children and the identification of the most successful programs/interventions. For 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
63 
children, in particular, we highlight the systematic review conducted by Davies et al. (2013), 
which was developed to understand the learning environments that promote creativity. Some of 
the most important environmental factors were the flexible use of space and time, the availability 
of appropriate materials, working outside the classroom/school, the playful or game-based 
approaches, and the opportunities for peer collaboration. Despite the relevance of their work, 
Davies et al. (2013) focused on environmental factors contributing to creativity, and not on 
interventions or programs that were specifically developed to stimulate creativity. Davies et al. 
(2014) also conducted a systematic review, but their focus was on the teacher’s roles in 
promoting students’ creativity. Their findings suggest that awareness of the learners’ needs, 
flexible lessons that balance freedom and structure, and specific interaction types (e.g., building 
positive relationships), support creativity. Chan (2013) contributed to the same topic highlighting 
the importance of a flexible structure, collaboration, and self-expression, as creativity facilitators. 
Gajda, Karwowski, and Beghetto (2017) conducted a meta-analysis investigating the relationship 
between creativity and academic achievement of children from elementary school to 
college/university level. The authors concluded that, on average, there is a positive (albeit 
modest) relationship between these two variables. This body of work shows the importance of 
having environments for creativity that balance task structure with freedom for exploration and 
autonomy of the children. 
Additionally, a meta-analysis conducted by de Jesus, Rus, Lens, and Imaginário (2013) 
identified a positive relationship between intrinsic motivation and creativity related to the 
creative product. Other previous meta-analyses have studied the relationship between 
intelligence and creativity (Kim, 2005, 2008; Silvia, 2008), denoting the relevance of the 
characteristics of the creative person. However, little or no evidence exists on the level of 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
64 
analysis for interventions to improve creativity. Additional systematic reviews and meta-analysis 
were conducted, focusing on the role of the family in fostering creativity (Miller, & Gerard, 
1979), stressors that hinder creativity (Byron, Khazanchi, & Nazarian, 2010), teachers beliefs in 
the ability to nurture creativity (Bereczki & Kárpáti, 2018), and the usage of pedagogy to ground 
learning for creative thinking (Sawyer, 2017). 
All in all, existing literature does not provide a comprehensive summary of existing 
interventions for creativity. As such, a summary of evidence about the effects of interventions is 
needed as the problem with individual research findings studies is that each study only shows a 
partial contribution to the full story of creativity (Cronin & Loewenstein, 2018). This hinders 
researchers and practitioners that aim to perform creativity interventions to find the best 
programs and interventions that fit their needs, as well as hampers a holistic understanding of the 
advancements in this field. 
Our Contribution 
This Chapter presents a systematic review of the literature about creativity interventions 
dedicated to children. Creativity research lacks an understanding of existing programs for 
creativity stimulation in children and the effectiveness of such programs. This holds true 
especially for interventions focused on children. The research in this area appears scattered; 
hindering researchers from searching, selecting, and applying these interventions. By providing a 
systematic summary of evidence of creativity interventions, we can better understand how 
creativity is being measured and the efficacy of the programs. The results from this work also 
inform policy makers and practitioners about evidence-based intervention aiming for creativity 
stimulation (Beelmann, 2006). 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
65 
Additionally, there is a need to classify creativity interventions according to a structured 
level of analysis as different terms, labels, expressions, and definitions, have been used 
interchangeably in the field of creativity. Scholars recognize the difficulties in reaching a 
consensus about how to classify creativity (Runco, Nemiro, & Walberg, 1998). For example, 
authors discussed the existence of different labels to refer to “problem-solving” (Abdulla & 
Cramond, 2018), and urged for clarity between the terms “creative potential” and “creative 
behavior” (Ivcevic, 2009). This systematic review contributes to the clarification of levels of 
analysis of creativity interventions by extending a coding scheme (Scott, Leritz, & Mumford, 
2004a). This classification system provides researchers with a common ground to compare the 
efficacy of existing interventions and design future ones. It is composed of the following levels: 
cognitive processing skills, training techniques, delivery media, practice exercises, creative 
target, ambient of the intervention, administrator, and dimension. Therefore, the research 
question for this work is: What characterizes interventions that foster creativity in children? 
Method 
Protocol and Registration 
A systematic review was conducted to investigate evidence-based creativity interventions 
and programs dedicated to children (Beelmann, 2006). We used the PRISMA-P (Preferred 
Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses) protocol to report our findings 
(Moher et al., 2015). The protocol for this systematic review was registered on PROSPERO 
(Unique ID number: PROSPERO 2016 CRD42016052101) and is available in full on Alves-
Oliveira, Arriaga, Nogueira, Hoffman, and Paiva (2016). 
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
66 
Table 9. Inclusion and exclusion criteria according to PICO Framework (Schardt et al, 2007). Retrieved from Alves-Oliveira, Xavier, 
Arriaga, Hoffman, and Paiva (under review). 
 
Inclusion criteria 
Exclusion criteria 
Population 
Children between 5-12 years old. 
Studies with restricted populations such as children with physical (e.g., 
motor disabilities), mental disorders (e.g., autism spectrum disorder) or 
gifted; and children with different age-ranges, unless the average age is 
within the scope of our age criteria. 
Intervention 
Literature reporting the outcomes of creativity interventions on 
creativity. 
Studies that only investigated effects of other interventions (e.g., arts and 
crafts activities) on creativity, or investigated the relation or effects of 
creativity on other outcomes (e.g., reward, instruction, affect/emotion). 
Comparison 
No intervention, different treatment, control group, pre-test and 
post-test measures. 
n/a 
Outcome 
Quantitative (statistical) results reporting the effect of creativity 
interventions on creativity levels. Results can include both 
quantitative and qualitative results, if qualitative findings are 
meant to deepen the understanding of the quantitative results. 
Articles of exclusively qualitative and/or theoretical approach. 
Study 
design 
Experimental studies presenting the methodological design, 
including sample size, measures and statistical analyses.  
Literature lacking the description of the intervention or information about 
the study design. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
67 
Eligibility Criteria 
Study characteristics. PICOS framework was used to describe the inclusion and 
exclusion criteria according to the Population (P), Intervention (I), Comparison (C), Outcome 
(O), and Study design (S) (see Table 2) (Schardt, Adams, Owens, Keitz, & Fontelo, 2007). 
Report characteristics. The present systematic review includes articles from 1950-2018. 
We included articles from 1950, because it is the date when J. P. Guilford highlighted the need in 
studying creativity empirically in the American Psychological Association (Guilford, 1950). We 
included peer-reviewed articles written in English and Portuguese, but excluded grey literature 
(e.g., opinion pieces), book chapters, dissertations, abstracts, and technical reports. 
Information Sources 
We started our search by reading systematic reviews and meta-analysis, such as 
(Jausovec, 1994; Cropley, 1997; Mansfield et al., 1978; Nickerson, 1999; Scott et al., 2004a). 
Hand-search was performed by consulting the citations to identify candidate articles of interest 
for the present systematic review. The most recent systematic review on creativity programs is 
from 2004. The difference between our systematic review and those referred above is that our 
systematic review summarizes evidence of interventions and/or creativity training programs 
exclusively dedicated to children at elementary school age. The reason why we focus on this 
target age is because previous research has shown that children in this age experience a decrease 
in their creativity (i.e., the “creativity crisis”). It is also a key-stage where creativity can be 
nurtured and developed. 
Then, a more complete search was performed using the following electronic databases: 
ISI Web of Science, Scopus, PubMed, and EBSCO. Using EBSCO, we searched the following  
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
68 
Table 10. Search-terms used in different databases. Retrieved from Alves-Oliveira, Xavier, 
Arriaga, Hoffman, and Paiva (under review). 
 
Databases 
Search codes 
PsycARTICLES 
(creativity) N10 (program OR train* OR promot* OR enhanc* 
OR develop* OR measur* OR evaluat*) AND (child*) 
PubMED 
((((creativeness[MeSH Terms]) OR “creativity”[MeSH Terms]) 
AND training program[MeSH Terms]) AND “child”[MeSH 
Terms]) AND “education”[MeSH Terms] 
IEEE 
((creativity) AND (promote OR evaluate OR train OR enhance 
OR develop OR measure) AND (child*)) 
ACM 
(creativity) AND (promote OR evaluate OR enhance) AND 
(children) 
Psychology of Aesthetics, Creativity, and 
the Arts Journal 
(creativity) NEAR/10 (program OR train* OR promot* OR 
enhanc* OR develop* OR measur* OR evaluat*) 
AND (child*) 
ISI Web of Knowledge; SCOPUS; Journal 
of Creative Behavior; Thinking Skills and 
Creativity; Creativity Research Journal; 
Journal of Creative Studies; International 
Conference on Computational Creativity 
Creativity & Cognition Conference; 
International Conference on Design 
Creativity; Google Scholar Search Engine 
(creativity) AND (program OR train* OR promot* OR enhanc* 
OR develop* OR measur* OR evaluat*) 
AND (child*) 
 
 
 
databases: PsycARTICLES, ERIC (Education Resources Information Center), Psychology and 
Behavioral Sciences Collection, PsycINFO, and MEDLINE. Google Scholar search portal was 
additionally used to identify publications not indexed in the above-mentioned databases. Other 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
69 
Publishers, such as the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) and the 
Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) were consulted. Additionally, we searched for 
articles that focused on the topic of this systematic review in the following selected journals: 
“Psychology of Aesthetics, Creativity, and the Arts”, “Journal of Creative Behavior”, “Thinking 
Skills and Creativity”, “Creativity Research Journal”, and “Creativity Studies”. The same 
procedure was conducted for selected conferences of interest: “International Conference on 
Computational Creativity”, “Creativity & Cognition Conference”, and “International Conference 
on Design Creativity”. This last step was to perform hand-search on the references of these 
articles and select articles not identified in previous searches. For all the selected articles, 
duplicates were then removed. Data collection ceased when we reached saturation, which 
occurred when all the newly identified articles already existed in the database no matter how 
many more articles were hand-searched (Morse, 1995). 
Finally, we contacted several authors working on the field of creativity to avoid the file-
drawer problem, which is considered the tendency of researchers to not submit articles with null 
results, or for journals to only publish studies with statistically significant results (Rosenthal, 
1979). Therefore, 35 authors were contacted via email and asked whether they were aware of 
unpublished or ongoing studies in the scope of this systematic review, with 12 scholars returning 
responses; however, no author provided additional articles to include in this systematic review. 
Search Strategy 
Query terms used for this systematic review included the title, the abstract, and the body 
of the articles. Our search algorithm was composed of combinations that include Boolean and 
proximity operators, wild card characters or truncation operators, and MeSH terms (Medical 
Subject Headings), the latter is a comprehensive controlled vocabulary for indexing journal 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
70 
 
Figure 8. Flow chart of data collection of articles, according to PRISMA-P guidelines (Moher et 
al., 2015). Retrieved from Alves-Oliveira, Xavier, Arriaga, Hoffman, and Paiva (under review). 
 
articles and books in the life sciences. A set of search codes was generated to accommodate 
distinct search engines and used across several databases (see Table 3). 
Study Records 
Data management. Endnote from Clarivate Analysis was used for citation management 
of the searches (Bramer, Giustini, de Jonge, Holland, & Bekhuis, 2016). A literature search was 
upload from Endnote to the Covidence Software (Babineau, 2014), an Internet-based software 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
71 
program that facilitates collaboration among reviewers during the selection of articles to be 
included in the systematic review. 
Selection process. The search process returned a total of 2503 publications that included 
a total of 9406 participants. A flow chart of the literature selection process is illustrated in Figure 
8. From the total pool of articles, 1102 through citations from previous systematic literature 
reviews and meta-analysis, 61 through ISI Web of Science, 1410 were identified through 
PsycARTICLES databases, 545 from selected journals and conferences, 119 with PubMed, 73 
through SCOPUS, 70 through IEEE and ACM publishers, 225 using Google Scholar portal. 
From this pool of publications, 559 articles were identified as duplicates, resulting in a total of 
1944 articles after duplicates removal. Title and abstract from these articles were screened by 
judging against the eligibility criteria, resulting in 1596 articles excluded during screening and 
deriving in 348 articles assessed for eligibility. After full-text reading, 299 articles were excluded 
after comparing them to the inclusion criteria. The final sample of included articles for this 
systematic review was 48. The search started in 2016 and was updated in 2019. 
Data items. From the selected articles, we extracted the descriptors of the interventions, 
including sample details, intervention duration, controlled factors, intervention, measures, main 
findings, and limitations (see details in Table 4). 
Quality Assessment 
Criterion for quality assessment was defined according to methodological recommendations of 
the Strengthening the STROBE Statement (Reporting of Observational Studies in Epidemiology) 
(Von Elm et al., 2007). STROBE provides guidance for the report of observational studies, 
critical appraisal and interpretation of studies. For this systematic review, the quality of the 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
72 
 
 
Figure 9. Quality assessment, demonstrating the risk of bias of the studies included in this 
systematic review, according to methodologically recommendations of the Strengthening the 
Reporting of Observational Studies in Epidemiology (STROBE) statement (Von Elm et al., 2007). 
Retrieved from Alves-Oliveira, Xavier, Arriaga, Hoffman, and Paiva (under review). 
 
included studies was assessed using the checklist items for the method section which supports the 
understanding of the planned procedure with sufficient detail that allows others to understand the 
study essentials, to judge whether the methods were adequate to provide reliable and valid answers, 
and to assess whether any deviations from the original plan were reasonable (Von Elm et al., 2007). 
Therefore, each article was assessed for study design, setting, participants, variables, data 
sources/measurement, bias, study size, quantitative variables, and statistical methods (see Figure 
9 and Table 5). For each of these items, the articles were measured according to the following 
criteria: (1) complies with STROBE recommended quality criterion; (2) does not comply with 
STROBE recommended quality criterion; (3) partially complies with STROBE recommended 
quality criterion.
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
73 
Table 11. Descriptors related with creativity of the studies included in this systematic review. Subtitles: Gender: F = Female, M = 
Male, Both = Male and Female; Dur. = Duration; Intervention: EX = Experimental condition, CT = Control condition, CM = 
Comparison condition. Limitations are stated as presented in the papers. Retrieved from Alves-Oliveira, Xavier, Arriaga, Hoffman, 
and Paiva (under review). 
 
Ref. 
Sample 
N, 
gender, 
age 
Dur. 
(N 
sessions) 
Controlled 
factors 
Intervention 
Measures 
Findings 
Limitations 
Feldhusen, 
Bahlke, and 
Treffinger (1969) 
256, n/a, 
8-12  
23 
Grade, gender, 
intelligence quotient 
EX: Radio Series Program; 
CT: No intervention 
Minnesota Tests of 
Creative Thinking 
EX > CT 
n/a 
Shivley, 
Feldhusen, and 
Treffinger (1972) 
377, 
n/a, 
10-11 
18 
Creative abilities 
of the teachers 
EX1: Purdue Creative 
Thinking Program; 
EX2: Productive 
Thinking Program w/ 
discussion; CM1: Purdue 
Creative Thinking Program 
with discussion; CM2: 
Productive Thinking 
Program w/ discussion 
Torrance Test of 
Creative Thinking 
and Childhood 
Attitude Inventory 
for Problem Solving 
EX1, EX2 > 
CM1, CM2; 
EX1 < EX2 
n/a 
Dansky and 
Silverman (1973) 
90, 
both, 
4-6 
1 
Ethnicity, 
socioeconomic 
status 
EX: Free-play; CM: 
Imitation of object 
manipulation; CT: Painting 
activity 
Alternate Uses Test 
and behavior 
analysis 
EX > CM, 
CT; CM = 
CT 
n/a 
Alencar, 
Feldhusen, 
and Widlak 
(1976) 
578, 
n/a, 
9 − 11 
14 
Gender, grade level 
EX: Purdue Creative 
Thinking Program; CM: 
Purdue Creative Thinking 
Program with 
reinforcement; CT: No 
training and no 
reinforcement 
Torrance Test of 
Creative Thinking 
EX, CM > 
CT; EX > 
CM 
Only one 
metric was 
used to 
measure 
creativity 
Houtz and 
Feldhusen 
240, 
n/a, 
45 
Ethnicity, 
socioeconomic status 
EX: Purdue Elementary 
Problem Solving 
Purdue Inventory 
and Transfer test 
EX, CM > 
CT; EX > 
Children got 
used to the 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
74 
(1976) 
8-9 
Inventory; CM: Purdue 
Elementary Problem-
Solving Inventory with 
reward; CT: No training 
and no reward 
with open ended 
problems 
CM 
reward time, 
removing its 
main effect 
and purpose 
MacDonald, 
Heinberg, 
Fruehling, and 
Meredith 
(1976) 
96, n/a, 
10-11 
1 
Sociological type, 
gender, academic 
achievement 
EX: Training of Original 
Responses; CT: Self-
selection of activity 
Original responses 
after intervention 
and after 10 
months, and making 
inferences test 
EX > CT 
n/a 
Moreno and 
Hogan (1976) 
218, 
both, 
10-12 
15 
Gender, race, social-
class level, IQ, reading 
comprehension level 
EX: Productive Thinking 
Program; CT: Gates-
Peardon Reading Exercises 
Torrance Test of 
Creative Thinking 
EX > CT 
n/a 
Franklin and 
Richards (1977) 
119, 
n/a, 
9-10 
6 
Children: age, IQ, 
socioeconomic status; 
teachers: teaching style; 
schools: classroom 
environment 
EX: Divergent Production 
Exercises; CT: Artistic 
work 
Wallach and Kogan 
Tests of Alternate 
Uses, Similarities, 
Line Meanings, and 
Instances, Torrance 
Test of Creative 
Thinking, Guilford 
Test of Statements 
and Questions 
EX > CT 
n/a 
Goor and 
Rapoport 
(1977) 
142, 
both, 
11-13 
20 
Children: 
disadvantaged 
background; 
administrator: age, 
socioeconomic status 
EX: Creativity Games; CT: 
No intervention 
Torrance Test of 
Creative Thinking 
and Origence and 
Intelligence of the 
Welsh Figure 
Preference Test 
EX > CT 
n/a 
Huber, Treffinger, 
Tracy, and Rand 
(1979) 
648, 
n/a, 
8-12 
12 
Gifted children, 
ethnicity, 
socioeconomic status, 
IQ, performance, 
developmental 
factors, gender, race 
EX: Purdue Creativity 
Training Program; CT: No 
intervention 
Torrance Test of 
Creativity Thinking 
EX > CT 
Teachers lack 
training to 
implement 
the creativity 
programs; 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
75 
students seem 
to lack 
training in 
self-directed 
learning 
Cliatt, Shaw, and 
Sherwood (1980) 
37, 
both, 
5-6 
8 
Children: 
socioeconomic status; 
teachers: performance 
when applying the 
creative training 
EX: Divergent Thinking 
Questioning; CT: No 
training 
Torrance Test of 
Creative Thinking 
EX > CT 
n/a 
Dansky (1980) 
96, 
both, 
4-8 
1 
Socioeconomic status, 
equal distribution 
of players and 
nonplayers across 
conditions 
EX: Free play with make 
believe; CM: Problem-
solving with objects; CT: 
Imitation of object 
manipulation 
Alternate Uses Test 
EX > CM, 
CT 
Lacks deeper 
study of the 
relationship 
between 
play and 
fluency and its 
duration 
effects 
Haley (1984) 
89, 
both, 
4-6 
42 
Age, gender, 
socioeconomic status 
EX: Sociodrama; CM: 
Verbal Training Method; 
CT: No Training 
Torrance Test of 
Creative Thinking, 
and Thinking 
Creatively in Action 
and Movement Test 
EX, CM > 
CT; EX > 
CM 
n/a 
Baer Jr (1988) 
48, n/a, 
12-13 
3 
School achievement, 
socioeconomic status 
EX: Osborne-Parnes 
Creative Problem 
Solving; CT: No 
intervention 
Divergent and 
convergent-thinking 
tests 
EX > CT 
Dropout of 
students from 
the study due 
to its long-
term 
evaluation 
Clements (1991) 
73, 
both, 8 
75 
Socioeconomic status, 
ethnicity, achievement 
EX: LOGO computer 
programming; CM: 
Computer exercises; CT: 
No intervention 
Torrance Test of 
Creative Thinking 
EX > CM, 
CT; EX, CM 
> CT 
n/a 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
76 
Nelson and 
Lalemi (1991) 
40, n/a, 
7 − 12 
6 
n/a 
EX: Imagery training; CT: 
No training 
Torrance Test of 
Creative Thinking 
EX > CT 
n/a 
Flaherty (1992) 
45, 
both, 
8-9 
12 
Age, gender, 
IQ, socioeconomic 
status 
EX: Holistic Creativity 
Program; CT: No 
intervention 
Torrance Test of 
Creative Thinking, 
and Creativity 
Assessment Packet 
EX > CT 
n/a 
Meador (1995) 
107, 
n/a, 6 
24 
Giftedness of 
children 
EX: Synectics Training; 
CT: No intervention 
Torrance Test of 
Creative Thinking 
EX > CT 
n/a 
Baer (1996) 
157, 
n/a, 
12-13 
8 
n/a 
EX: Divergent-Thinking 
Program; CT: Arts’ classes 
Consensual 
Assessment 
Technique 
EX > CT 
n/a 
Krampen (1997) 
40, 
both, 
8-10 
1 
Age, grade, gender, 
previous experiences 
with systematic 
relaxation exercises 
EX: Systematic Relaxation 
Program; CT: Relaxation 
without instructions 
TDK for ideational 
and associative 
fluency 
EX > CT 
n/a 
Antonietti (2000) 
450, 
n/a, 
5-7 
52 
n/a 
EX1: Real life Analogies; 
EX2: socioemotional 
analogies; EX3: Text 
Analogies; CT: No 
intervention 
ABCD Test, Story 
Test, Problem Test, 
and Association 
Test 
EX1, EX2, 
EX3 > CT 
n/a 
Luftig (2000) 
615, 
both, 
7-11 
1 
acade
mic 
year 
Ethnicity, economic 
status 
EX: SPECTA+ program; 
CM: Innovative Program; 
CT: No intervention 
Torrance Test of 
Creative 
Thinking 
EX > CM, 
CT 
n/a 
Fleith, Renzulli, 
and Westberg 
(2002) 
217, 
both, 
8-12 
15 
Socioeconomic status, 
bilingual, monolingual 
children 
EX: New Directions in 
Creativity Program; CT: 
No intervention 
Torrance Test of 
Creative 
Thinking 
EX > CT 
Small sample 
size; cultural 
differences 
were not 
considered 
Majid, Tan, and 
Soh (2003) 
60, 
both, 
10-11 
5 
 
Academic performance, 
Language proficiency, 
Competence in writing  
EX: Writing with 
Language Creativity 
Score Sheet; 
Creativity 
CM > EX, 
CT 
n/a 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
77 
SCAMPER; CM: Writing 
with Internet; CT: Normal 
writing task 
Rating Scale 
Garaigordobil, 
and Landazabal 
(2005) 
86, 
both, 
10-11 
1 
acade
mic 
year 
Age, gender, academic 
aptitude, achievements, 
socio-cultural level 
EX: Prosocial and Creative 
Play Program; CT: Ethics 
and arts exercises 
Word Association 
Test and Kaufman 
Brief Intelligence 
Test 
EX > CT 
Lack of 
controlled 
characteristics 
of program 
administrators 
and setting’s 
variables 
Garaigordobil 
(2006) 
86, 
both, 
10-11 
1 
acade
mic 
year 
Children: age, gender, 
academic aptitude, 
achievement, socio-
cultural level; parents: 
socioeconomic status, 
educational background 
EX: Cooperative-Creative 
Play Program; CT: plastic 
arts 
Torrance Test of 
Creative Thinking, 
and Creation of a 
painting 
EX > CT 
Lack of 
controlled 
characteristics 
of the program 
administrator 
and setting’s 
variables 
Hui and Lau 
(2006) 
126, 
both, 
7-9 
16 
n/a 
EX: Drama Project; CT: 
No intervention 
Wallach-Kogan 
Creativity Tests, 
Tests for Creative 
Thinking-Drawing 
Production, and 
Storytelling Test 
EX > CT 
n/a 
Burke and 
Williams (2008) 
178, 
both, 
11-12 
8 
Socioeconomic status, 
ethnicity, registered 
disabilities 
EX1: Individual Thinking 
Skills Program; EX2: 
Collaborative Thinking 
Skills Program; CT: 
No intervention 
Thinking Skills 
Assessment 
EX1, EX2 > 
CT; EX1 < 
EX2 
Lacks control 
of the 
disposition to 
learn thinking 
skills 
Justo (2008) 
36, 
both, 
5-6 
50  
n/a 
EX: Creative Relaxation 
Program CT: Children lie 
down w/ eyes closed 
Thinking Creatively 
in Action and 
Movement 
Test 
EX > CT 
n/a 
Maker, Jo, and 
Muammar (2008) 
1986, 
n/a, 
3 
years 
Ethnicity of students 
and teachers, 
DISCOVER Program 
Test of Creative 
Thinking-Drawing 
DISCOVER 
Usage of only 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
78 
5-12 
implementation 
expertise of teachers  
Production 
increased 
creativity 
over years 
one 
instrument to 
measure 
creativity; 
dropouts 
during the 
study; 
heterogeneity 
of the sample; 
non-expert 
administrators 
of measures 
Moore and Russ 
(2008) 
50, 
both, 
6-8 
5 
Ethnicity 
EX1: Play imagination; 
EX2: Play-affect; CT: 
Puzzle play 
Alternate Uses Test 
EX1, EX2 < 
CT 
Low power; 
different 
program 
administrator; 
poor testing 
conditions 
Pagona and 
Costas (2008) 
82, 
both, 9 
36 
Activities that influence 
motor behavior; area of 
living 
EX: Special Physical 
Education Program; CT: 
No intervention 
Motor Creativity 
Test 
EX > CT 
n/a 
Cheung (2010) 
60, n/a, 
5-6 
1 
n/a 
Movement Activity 
Program 
Torrance Test of 
Creative Thinking 
Movement 
Activity 
increased 
creativity 
skills 
in children 
from 
different 
schools 
Children with 
limited 
experience 
in creative 
movement; 
no control 
condition; no 
pre-posttest 
design 
Garaigordobil and 
Berrueco (2011) 
86, 
both, 
5-6 
1 
acade
mic 
year 
Age, gender, academic 
aptitudes and 
performance 
EX: Cooperative- 
Creative Play Program; 
CT: No intervention 
Torrance Test of 
Creative Thinking, 
and Scale of 
Creative Behaviors 
and Personality 
Traits 
EX > CT 
Lacks 
controlled 
characteristics 
of the person 
who 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
79 
administers 
the program 
Smogorzewska 
(2012) 
128, 
n/a, 
5-6 
4 
n/a 
EX1: Storyline Method; 
EX2: Associations 
Pyramid Method; CT: 
Telling stories 
Ratings of external 
judges 
EX1, EX2 > 
CT; EX1 = 
EX2 
Unbalanced 
conditions; 
lacks pre-
posttest 
design 
Alfonso-
Benlliure, 
Meléndez, and 
García Ballestros 
(2013)  
 
44, 
both, 
5-6 
6 
Age, gender, number of 
siblings 
EX: Creativity Intervention 
Program; CT: Regular 
classes  
Child Creativity 
Test 
EX > CT 
n/a 
Dziedziewicz, 
Oledzka, and 
Karwowski 
(2013) 
128, 
both, 
4-6 
10 
Size, type, territorial 
location of educational 
institutions, gender, age 
EX: Doodle-Book 
Program; CT: No 
intervention 
Franck Drawing 
Completion Test, 
and Torrance Test 
of Creative 
Thinking 
EX > CT 
Priming 
effect; lacks 
control of 
external 
variables 
Akar and Sengil-
Akar (2013) 
26, 
both, 
10-11 
9 
School’s 
achievement, 
age, socioeconomic 
status 
CREACT 
Conceptualization, 
drawing, and 
painting tasks 
CREACT 
Was 
effective 
on 
developing 
children’s 
creative 
thinking 
performance 
Lacks control 
group 
Kara, Aydin, and 
Cagiltay (2013) 
90, 
both, 
4-6 
1 
n/a 
EX1: StoryTech Program 
individual; EX2: 
StoryTech Program 
collaborative; CT1: 
passive toy activity 
individual; CT2: passive 
toy activity individual 
Story patterns, and 
number of 
imaginative objects 
EX1, EX2 > 
CT 1, CT 2 
n/a 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
80 
Dziedziewicz, 
Gadja, and 
Karwowski 
(2014) 
121, 
both, 
8-12 
30 
Size, gender, age 
EX: Creativity Compass 
Program; CT: No 
intervention 
Franck Drawing 
Completion Test, 
and Torrance Test 
of Creative 
Thinking 
EX > CT 
Possible 
priming 
effect 
Smogorzewska 
(2014) 
460, 
both, 
4-5 
18 
n/a 
EX1: Storyline Method; 
EX2: Associations 
Pyramid Method; CT: 
Listen to stories 
Behavior analysis 
of storytelling 
EX1, EX2 = 
CT 
Only one 
measure of 
creativity; 
Lacks 
measurement 
of motivation 
to perform the 
study 
Gordon, Breazeal, 
and Engel (2015) 
71, 
both, 
3-8 
1  
Previous interactions 
with robots 
EX: Curious robot; CM: 
Curious tablet; CT: Non-
curious robot 
Free Exploration, 
Question 
Generation, and 
Uncertainty 
Seeking  
EX, CM > 
CT; EX = 
CM 
n/a 
Sowden, 
Clements, 
Redlich, and 
Lewis (2015) – 
Study 1 
27, 
both, 
9-10 
1 
Gender 
EX: Dance improvisation 
Program; CM: Command-
style dance 
Consensual 
Assessment 
Technique, and 
Product Design 
Task 
EX > CM 
n/a 
Sowden, 
Clements, 
Redlich, and 
Lewis (2015) – 
Study 2 
34, n/a, 
10-11 
n/a 
Gender 
EX: Improvisation Games 
Program; CT: No 
intervention 
Torrance Test of 
Creative Thinking 
EX > CT 
Lacks control 
for individual 
differences 
between 
participants 
Doron (2016) 
150, 
both, 
9-13 
10 
Age, gender, 
socioeconomic 
status, religion 
EX: Intervention Model for 
Enhancing Divergent 
Thinking; CT: No 
intervention 
Tel Aviv Creativity 
Test 
EX > CT 
Lacks 
additional 
creativity 
evaluation 
metrics 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
81 
Hoffmann and 
Russ (2016) 
42, F, 
5-8 
6 
Ethnicity, 
socioeconomic 
status 
EX: Pretend Play 
Intervention; CT: Puzzles, 
coloring sheets, etc 
Affect in Play 
Scale, Alternate 
Uses Task, 
Storytelling Task, 
and Behavior 
analysis 
EX > CT 
Small sample 
and gender 
specific 
Azevedo, Morais, 
and Martins 
(2017) 
131, 
both, 
12 − 15 
5 
Gender 
EX: Future Problem 
Solving Program 
International; CT: No 
intervention 
Torrance Test 
Creative 
Thinking 
EX > CT 
Lacks control 
group 
Doron (2017) 
286, 
both, 
10 − 14 
10 
Age, gender, 
socioeconomic 
status, religion 
EX: Intervention 
Model for Enhancing 
Divergent Thinking; 
CT: No intervention 
Tel Aviv Creativity 
Test 
EX > CT 
Lacks 
comparison 
condition 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
82 
Table 12. Quality assessment of the method of included studies. Moon palette: ● – Complies with STROBE recommended quality 
criterion; ○ - Does not comply with STROBE recommended quality criterion; ◗ - Partially complies with STROBE recommended 
quality criterion. Retrieved from Alves-Oliveira, Xavier, Arriaga, Hoffman, and Paiva (under review). 
 
References 
Study 
design 
Setting 
Partici- 
pants 
Variables 
Measurement 
Bias 
Study 
size 
Quantitative 
variables 
Statistical 
method 
Feldhusen et al. (1969) 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
○ 
● 
● 
Shivley et al. (1972) 
● 
◗ 
◗ 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
Dansky and Silverman 
(1973) 
● 
◗ 
◗ 
● 
● 
● 
○ 
● 
● 
Piers and Morgan (1973) 
● 
◗ 
● 
● 
● 
● 
○ 
● 
● 
Alencar et al. (1976) 
● 
◗ 
● 
● 
● 
● 
○ 
○ 
● 
Houtz and Feldhusen 
(1976) 
● 
◗ 
● 
● 
● 
● 
○ 
● 
● 
MacDonald et al. (1976) 
● 
◗ 
◗ 
● 
● 
● 
○ 
● 
● 
Moreno and Hogan (1976) 
● 
◗ 
◗ 
● 
◗ 
● 
○ 
● 
● 
Franklin and Richards 
(1977) 
◗ 
◗ 
● 
● 
● 
● 
○ 
● 
● 
Goor and Rapoport (1977) 
● 
◗ 
● 
● 
● 
● 
○ 
● 
● 
Huber et al. (1979) 
● 
◗ 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
Cliatt et al. (1980) 
● 
◗ 
◗ 
● 
◗ 
● 
○ 
● 
● 
Dansky (1980) 
● 
◗ 
● 
● 
● 
● 
○ 
● 
● 
Haley (1984) 
● 
○ 
● 
● 
● 
● 
○ 
● 
● 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
83 
Baer (1988) 
● 
◗ 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
◗ 
Clements (1991) 
● 
◗ 
◗ 
● 
● 
● 
◗ 
● 
● 
Nelson and Lalemi (1991) 
● 
◗ 
○ 
● 
● 
● 
○ 
● 
◗ 
Flaherty (1992) 
● 
● 
◗ 
● 
◗ 
● 
◗ 
● 
● 
Meador (1995) 
● 
◗ 
● 
● 
● 
● 
○ 
● 
● 
Baer (1996) 
● 
◗ 
● 
● 
● 
● 
○ 
● 
● 
Krampen (1997) 
● 
○ 
◗ 
● 
○ 
● 
○ 
● 
● 
Antonietti (2000) 
○ 
◗ 
● 
● 
● 
● 
○ 
● 
● 
Luftig (2000) 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
○ 
● 
● 
Fleith et al. (2002) 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
○ 
● 
● 
Majid et al. (2003) 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
○ 
● 
● 
Garaigordobil Landazabal 
(2005) 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
○ 
● 
● 
Garaigordobil (2006) 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
○ 
● 
● 
Hui and Lau (2006) 
● 
◗ 
● 
● 
● 
● 
○ 
● 
● 
Burke and Williams (2008) 
◗ 
◗ 
● 
● 
● 
● 
○ 
● 
● 
Justo (2008) 
● 
◗ 
● 
● 
● 
● 
◗ 
● 
● 
Maker et al. (2008) 
● 
◗ 
◗ 
● 
● 
○ 
◗ 
● 
● 
Moore and Russ (2008) 
● 
◗ 
◗ 
● 
● 
● 
◗ 
● 
● 
Pagona and Costas (2008) 
● 
● 
◗ 
◗ 
◗ 
○ 
○ 
◗ 
● 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
84 
Cheung (2010) 
● 
○ 
◗ 
● 
● 
○ 
○ 
● 
● 
Garaigordobil and Berrueco 
(2011) 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
◗ 
● 
● 
Smogorzewska (2012) 
● 
○ 
◗ 
● 
● 
● 
○ 
● 
● 
Alfonso-Benlliure et al. 
(2013)  
● 
◗ 
● 
● 
● 
● 
○ 
● 
● 
Dziedziewicz et al. (2013) 
◗ 
◗ 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
İbrahim and Sengil-Akar 
(2013) 
◗ 
◗ 
● 
● 
● 
○ 
◗ 
● 
● 
Kara et al. (2013) 
● 
● 
● 
◗ 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
Dziedziewicz et al. (2014) 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
Smogorzewska (2014) 
● 
○ 
◗ 
● 
● 
● 
◗ 
● 
● 
Gordon et al. (2015) 
● 
◗ 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
Sowden et al. (2015) 
◗ 
◗ 
● 
● 
● 
● 
◗ 
● 
● 
Doron (2016) 
● 
◗ 
● 
● 
● 
● 
◗ 
● 
● 
Hoffmann and Russ (2016) 
◗ 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
Azevedo et al. (2017) 
◗ 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
Doron (2017) 
◗ 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
◗ 
● 
● 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
85 
Taxonomy of Creativity Interventions 
Once we enter the field of creativity, many seemingly related or even equivalent 
definitions and concepts emerge, leading to a lack of conceptual grounding and mutual 
understanding in creativity research as a holistic and integrated field. As a limitation, it becomes 
difficult to describe and compare the reported effectiveness of existing interventions for 
creativity without a common taxonomy of the level of analysis for creativity interventions. A 
second limitation relates to the search of interventions for creativity that target specific creative 
cognitive processes. For example, if one wants to stimulate the generation of ideas and searches 
for an intervention/program dedicated to idea generation, then one is faced with many 
intervention options that do not necessarily focus on idea generation. In addition, programs 
targeting idea generation use different labels to refer to the same concept, and therefore, not 
appearing in the initial search. 
The lack of a comprehensive and inclusive definition, which can both frame contributions 
to and is recognized by authors in the field of creativity stimulation, drove the core analysis of 
creativity interventions. We have performed a deductive coding scheme to systematize these 
levels by combining prior definitions developed by researchers in this field with concepts that 
lacked formal definition. In essence our coding scheme proposes a taxonomy of creativity 
interventions that properly defines key-terms of creativity training, and can be used in a 
comprehensive way to both serve and understand research on creativity. A comprehensive 
illustration of the structure of the coding scheme is present in Figure 10.
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
86 
 
Figure 10. Taxonomy of Creativity Elements proposed by this systematic review, elaborated in 
Table 6. Retrieved from Alves-Oliveira, Xavier, Arriaga, Hoffman, and Paiva (under review). 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
87 
Coding Procedure 
The creation of the coding scheme followed these steps: (1) gathering existing 
classification systems of creativity present in literature; (2) complementing these systems with 
new categories not represented; and (3) creating a taxonomy in which all the included labels of 
the coding scheme are associated with a definition based on prior publications. The classification 
from Scott, Leritz, and Mumford (2004b) included the following level of analysis of creativity 
interventions: cognitive processing skills, training techniques, delivery media, and practice 
exercises. Following this classification system, two independent coders coded the interventions. 
However, during the coding process, coders encountered attributes of interventions that were not 
represented by the Scott et al. (2004b) codification system. Therefore, to fully represent the 
scope of creativity interventions, which includes four new levels. Whenever a new element was 
added, the coders were instructed to name and define it. The end result is what we call the 
Taxonomy of Creativity Interventions, which includes four new levels of analysis: target, 
ambient, administrator, and dimension. Additionally, the coders included new items for the 
initial levels of the coding system. 
Initially, the Delivery Media element proposed by Scott et al. (2004b) incorporated a set 
of 10 different media used to deliver the creativity interventions (e.g., lecture video and audio 
tapes), and so 8 new media were added by the coders (e.g., interactive whiteboards, robots). 
Furthermore, the coders provided definitions for each of the levels of analysis based on existing 
definitions in creativity research. To ensure consistency across coders, calibration exercises 
before starting the coding were performed until reaching stability, a process recommended to 
reach reliability in coding (Krippendorff & Bock, 2009). When the initial set of articles was 
coded, the coders met with the goal of solving discrepancies in their coding (Campbell, Quincy, 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
88 
Osserman, & Pedersen, 2013). Therefore, they compared their coding scheme to ascertain 
concordances (i.e., alignment in definitions, language, and coding logic). Whenever there were 
discrepancies in the coding, coders used the “negotiation agreement” and verbally discussed their 
coding in a mutual effort to reconcile disagreements and divergence (Garrison, Cleveland-Innes, 
Koole, & Kappelman, 2006; Hoyle, Harris, & Judd, 2002). Negotiations between coders 
regarding data collection were timed and lasted around 146.5 hours. 
Level of Analysis of Creativity Interventions 
Our taxonomy is composed of eight level of analysis of creativity interventions: cognitive 
processing skills, training techniques, delivery media, practice exercises, target, ambient, 
administrator, and dimension. Each of these levels is composed of a set of items that can be used 
to categorize and define each intervention or training program for creativity. Multiple items from 
the same level can be selected to define an intervention. The core level of analysis and their 
items are explained below, summarized in Table 6, and visually represented in Figure 10 
• Cognitive processing skills — Major types of cognitive operations involved in creative 
thought: Problem finding, information gathering, concept selection, conceptual 
combination, idea generation, idea evaluation, implementation planning, solution 
planning, flexibility, and originality; 
• Training techniques — General instructional methods held to develop one or more 
processing skills: Divergent thinking, convergent thinking, critical thinking, meta-
cognition, ideation, elaboration, illumination, constraint identification, strength and 
weaknesses identification, feature comparison, feature listing, analogies, check listing, 
brainstorming, imagery, metaphors, and expressive activities; 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
89 
• Delivery media — Media used to deliver the creativity intervention/program: Lectures, 
video and audio tapes, computer, individualized coaching, programmed instruction, 
discussion, social modeling, behavioral modification, cooperative learning, case-based 
instruction, smart objects, robot, TV, interactive whiteboards, toys, camera, art and crafts, 
and games; 
• Practice exercises — Type of exercises embedded in the instructional training program: 
Classroom exercises, field exercises, group exercises, domain-based performance 
exercises, computer exercises, written exercises, self-paced exercises, imaginative 
exercises, sensory stimulation, physical exercises, art exercises, and play; 
• Target — Where the impact of the creative training is intended to take place: Person, 
process, product, and environment; 
• Ambient — Physical location where the creative intervention of program training is 
performed: Laboratory/University, public space, school, home, or work; 
• Administrator — Person(s) that perform the creativity intervention or training program: 
Researcher, teacher, student, parent, psychologist facilitator, or self-directed/without 
administrator; 
• Dimension — Social context of the intervention/training: Group, individual, or both. 
Results 
Profile of Creativity Interventions 
All studies followed a quasi-experimental research design method. Since a majority of the 
studies were performed in the school context, studies selected classes and therefore used the 
school specifications (system of classes). In terms of the methodology used, 96% of the studies 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
90 
Table 13. Taxonomy of the Creativity Elements with its correspondent level of analysis. Items 
with an asterisk symbol (*) indicate they were added and defined in the scope of this systematic 
review to complement the coding scheme initiated by Scott et al. (2004b). Retrieved from Alves-
Oliveira, Xavier, Arriaga, Hoffman, and Paiva (under review). 
 
Level of analysis 
Definition 
Reference(s) 
Cognitive processing skills 
Problem finding 
Recognition of the existence of a problem, gaps, inconsistencies, 
or flaws, or recognition that unexploited opportunities exists, or 
that an unresolved problem is in need of a solution. 
Lubart (2001); Zhou 
and George (2003) 
Information 
gathering 
Gather or being exposed to information that normally is not 
encountered on a day-to-day basis. 
Zhou and George 
(2003) 
Concept selection 
Recognize and select concepts generated. 
Rietzschel, Nijstad, 
and Stroebe (2010) 
Conceptual 
combination 
An attribute that is necessary for any of the parent concepts have 
to be inherited by the conjunction. 
Hampton (1987) 
Idea generation 
Ability to come up with new ideas, including the process of 
creating, developing and communicating ideas which are 
abstract, concrete or visual. 
Guilford (1967) 
Idea evaluation 
Evaluate ideas, verify feasibility, communicate ideas to others, 
forecast future implications. 
Zhou and George 
(2003) 
Implementation 
planning 
Successful implementation of new ideas requires planning, which 
is a selection, organization, and execution of actions that 
facilitate the attainment of certain goals. Planning is also defined 
as an inherent generative activity involving the mental simulation 
of future actions. 
Osburn and Mumford 
(2006) 
Solution 
monitoring 
Specific action steps which will lead to a successful installation 
of the new solution. 
Smith (1995) 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
91 
*Flexibility 
Ability to develop qualitatively different solutions. The more 
categories, the more flexible. 
Guilford (1967) 
*Originality 
Ability to produce rare and unusual ideas. 
Guilford (1967) 
Training techniques 
Divergent 
thinking 
Involves producing multiple or alternative answers from 
available information. 
Cropley (2006) 
Convergent 
thinking 
Oriented toward deriving the single best (or correct) answer to a 
clearly defined question. 
Cropley (2006) 
Critical thinking 
The correct assessment of statement, including awareness of 
multiple perspectives and alternatives. 
Ennis (1962) 
Meta-cognition 
Includes both the knowledge and the control that individuals have 
over their own cognitive processes. 
Armbruster (1989) 
Ideation 
The generation and of multiple ideas without having the need of a 
specific goal. 
Armbruster (1989) 
Elaboration 
The ability to expand, develop, particularize, and embellish ideas. 
Guilford (1967) 
Illumination 
Related with the fast insight of ideas. Defined as the A-ha 
experience. 
Callahan and Renzulli 
(1977) 
Constraint 
identification 
Constraints imposed by the exterior or interior that lead to new 
creations. 
Johnson-Laird (1988) 
Strength and 
weakness 
identification 
Identifying strengths and weakness and how they can counteract 
creation. 
Mayer (1999) 
Feature 
comparison 
Listing similarities and differences among objects or 
performance. 
Michinov and Primois 
(2005) 
Feature listing 
Listing of different characteristics that can lead to unique 
associations. 
Whiting 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
92 
(1958); Baughman 
and Mumford (1995); 
Ward (2007) 
Analogies 
Explaining the strange with familiar events. 
Johnson-Laird (1989) 
Checklisting 
List of combinations, encouraging taking an action according to 
the available material. 
Warren and Davis 
(1969) 
Brainstorming 
Verbalize thoughts in a group so that other person’s ideas prompt 
others. Generating unconventional ideas by suppressing the 
common tendency to criticize or reject them. 
Osborn (1953) 
Imagery 
Usage of vivid and descriptive language to add depth to a 
description. It appeals to human senses to transform and integrate 
different components or ideas. Includes the formation of mental 
images, figures, or likenesses of things, or of such images 
collectively; pictorial images, as in works of art, and the use of 
rhetorical images. 
Roskos-Ewoldson, 
Intons-Peterson, and 
Anderson (1993) 
Metaphors 
Figure of speech that directly refers to one thing by mentioning 
another for rhetorical effect. It may provide clarity or identify 
hidden similarities between two ideas. It implies 
correspondences, or mappings, between a source and a target 
domain. 
Lubart and Getz 
(1997); Kövecses 
(2010) 
Expressive 
activities 
Communicating in an expressive way, by using gestures or 
speech. E.g., drama, dance, meditation, breathing exercises and 
emotional expression, includes relaxation techniques, etc. 
Torrance and 
Torrance (1972) 
Delivery media 
Lecture 
Oral presentation intended to present information about a 
particular subject. Used to convey critical information, history, 
background, theories, and equations. 
Maker et al. (2008) 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
93 
Video and audio 
tapes 
Video-taped or audio-taped content, such as items presented to 
students using a tape recorder (frequently used in the Purdue 
Creativity Training Program) 
MacDonald et al. 
(1976) 
Computer 
Use of a computer as a media to deliver the training. 
n/a 
Individualized 
coaching 
Administrator works closely to participants, usually under a 
three-step procedure: the coach or program administrator gives 
instructions, participants have opportunities for practice, and a 
review stage of the performance. 
Oden and Asher 
(1977) 
Programmed 
instruction 
Administrator gives verbal instructions to participants, making 
these instructions the media to deliver the training program. 
Vargas and Vargas 
(1991) 
Discussion 
Process of analysis and ideas exchange about a given topic with 
another individual or a group to reach to a conclusion or 
agreement. 
Hoffmann and Russ 
(2016) 
Social modeling 
To intentionally exert control over cues (such as environmental 
variables) in relation to the behavior of someone. Includes the 
opposite effect of analyzing how individuals react to certain 
environmental cues. 
Bandura (1971) 
Behavioral 
modification 
Deliberate modification of behaviors as a way of delivering the 
program, e.g., relaxation. 
Justo (2008) 
Cooperative 
learning 
Participants learn cooperatively with each other. 
Smogorzewska 
(2014) 
Case-based 
instruction 
Instructions oriented towards specific cases or events. 
Mayo (2002) 
*Smart objects 
Objects that enhances the interaction. Includes interactions with 
physical world objects and to interaction with virtual objects. 
Tablet, smartphone, 
interactive objects. 
*Robot 
Related to "artificial intelligence" and the usage of robots with 
abilities to understand and interact with humans. 
Sarrica, Brondi, and 
Fortunati, (2019) 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
94 
*TV 
TV contents presented to explore different 
creative functions. 
Movie clips, 
exercises, short TV 
series scenes, 
animated TV series, 
etc. 
*Interactive 
whiteboards 
Large, interactive screen that connects a computer and a 
projector. 
Majid et al. (2003) 
*Toys 
Play object or figure. 
Dolls, digital toys, 
board games, action 
figures, cars toys, etc. 
*Camera 
Camera for photos or video recording. 
Photos, video 
recording. 
*Art and Crafts 
Crafts and manufactured elements or objects. 
Crayons, paper, tissue 
materials, canvas, etc. 
*Games 
Physical or intellectual activity with rules associated that can 
have an open- or closed-end. 
PC game, electronic 
games, spontaneous 
game, etc. 
Practice exercises 
Classroom 
exercises 
Includes any classroom-like environment. 
Smogorzewska 
(2012) 
Field exercises 
Includes all environments that are outside a classroom-type 
environment. 
Schoolyard, 
playground, 
forest. 
Group exercises 
When participants take the training in organized groups. 
Discussions, group 
exercises, etc. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
95 
Domain-based 
performance 
exercises 
Creativity can be domain-specific with training programs 
focusing on specific types of creativity, such as figural (or visual 
creativity), or verbal creativity. 
Baer (1998); Baer 
(2010); Plucker and 
Beghetto (2004); 
Kaufman and Baer 
(2005) 
Computer 
exercises 
Electronic/digital exercises. 
Includes smart 
devices, such as 
tablets, etc. 
Written exercises 
Creative content expressivity using writing. 
E.g., give a title to a 
text, write a story, etc. 
Self-paced 
exercises 
Exercises performed without having time as a pressing factor, 
being the exercises dependent on participants’ pace. 
Smogorzewska 
(2012) 
Imaginative 
exercises 
Exercises that stimulate the ability to reproduce on the mind, 
ideas, images, or sensations, without any immediate external or 
sensory input (such as to listen or to see). 
E.g., create or 
listening to a story, 
meditation; mental 
projection in 
relaxation exercises, 
etc. 
*Sensorial 
stimulation 
Exercises that involve the stimulation of any of five senses as the 
main component of the exercise, such as meditation. 
Meditation, visual 
stimuli such as 
images in a story, 
physical stimulation 
such as touch, etc. 
*Physical exercises 
Exercises that require participants to be physically active, such as 
motor exercises. 
Dance, physical 
education, breathing 
exercises. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
96 
*Art exercises 
Require the presence of some type of artistic expression. 
Painting, drama, 
colleagues, narrative 
or poem writing, 
story, dancing, draw, 
sculpting, etc. 
*Play 
The act of playing is the central exercise. 
Hoffmann and Russ 
(2016) 
Target 
*Person 
The program is evaluated in terms of the impact it had on the 
participants creativity skills. Occurs if the program is evaluated 
with pre- and post-tests. 
Validated creativity 
tests, such as pre-and 
post-tests that 
measure creative 
abilities. 
*Process 
Requires the evaluation of the process of creativity development. 
Behavioral 
observations or other 
media collected via 
audio and/or video 
recordings, enabling 
to analyze, e.g., the 
number of ideas 
generated during the 
training. 
*Product 
The program is evaluated in terms of the final creative product or 
production. 
Painting, 
composition, 
poem, story, etc. 
*Press or 
environment 
Evaluation how changes in environment affect creativity. Or the 
effects of the program in the environment. 
Impact of creativity 
levels in a country, 
impact of classroom 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
97 
structure in creativity 
levels, etc. 
Ambient  
*Laboratory or 
University 
Creativity training programs are applied in laboratory or 
university context. 
University labs. 
*Public spaces 
Creativity training programs are applied in public context. 
Summer camp, public 
park, etc. 
*Home 
Creativity training programs are applied in home context. 
Living room, 
bedroom of a house, 
etc. 
*School 
Creativity training programs are applied in school context. 
Classroom, 
playground, library, 
computer lab, school 
classroom, etc. 
Administrator 
*Researcher 
Includes university staff (students, professors, researchers). 
Dansky and 
Silverman (1973) 
*Facilitator 
Someone acts as a facilitator of the program, with a peripheral 
role in the delivery and application of the intervention or 
program. 
n/a 
*Psychologist 
The program is coordinated by a psychologist. 
Alfonso-Benlliure et 
al. (2013) 
*Teacher or 
professor 
School teachers administer the program. 
Smogorzewska 
(2012) 
*Parent 
When (a) parents administer the program. 
E.g., parent directs 
children in a given 
activity. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
98 
*Children 
When children are independent, acting individually or in group, 
without depending on external administrators. 
E.g., children’s free 
play and their effects 
on creativity. 
*Independence 
of use 
When participants can use the training program mostly on their 
own, without depending on external administrators. Note that 
there can be someone supervising or monitoring the program (to 
check exercises’ time), but it still has independence of use. 
n/a 
Dimension 
*Group 
When the program is meant for to be performed in pairs, a big 
group, or a small group. 
Work in pairs on 
computers. 
*Individual 
When the program is intended for an individual person. 
Individual exercises, 
etc. 
*Both 
In different moments, participants perform the program 
individually and in a group. 
Franklin and 
Richards (1977) 
 
included at least one control condition, 75% included a pre-test-and-post-test design, 90% 
performed quantitative analysis as the major outcome, and the remaining complemented 
quantitative results with qualitative analysis. The most common measurement type for data 
collection was scale-based metrics (79%), followed by behavioral observations (8%), 
combination of scale-based metrics and behavioral observations (6%), combination of scale-
based metrics with interview material (4%), and more rarely combining of all the aforementioned 
metrics (2%). In 42% of the included articles, creativity was investigated alongside with other 
variables, and 58% of the studies focused exclusively on creativity measurement and evaluation. 
For the studies that paired creativity investigation with additional variables, the additional 
measures focused mainly on the evaluation of cognition (e.g., intelligence, performance, 
achievements), affect, emotion, personality, self-esteem, and culture. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
99 
 
Figure 11. Recency of publications on creativity interventions for children. Retrieved from 
Alves-Oliveira, Xavier, Arriaga, Hoffman, and Paiva (under review). 
 
Since Guilford’s discourse in 1950 (Guilford, 1950) about the need for more research on 
the topic of creativity, studies in the field started to emerge in 1960 with only 1 article published 
per year targeting the topic of interventions of creativity for children. Exceptions were the years 
of 1978, 2008, and 2013, with an increased number of published studies consisting of a 
maximum of 4 studies published. Figure 11 shows the number of articles published per year. 
Most of these studies were conducted in the United States, followed by countries in 
Europe (Spain and Poland with 4 and 5 studies, respectively) and the remaining countries 
published between 1 to 3 articles, represented in lighter pink color. Figure 12 shows the location 
in which the studies were conducted given the authors’ affiliations of the published articles. 
We have also analyzed the keywords associated with each publication. The most frequent 
term used is “creativity”, “thinking”, “education”, “creative development”, and “children”. 
Figure 13 shows a cloud chart of all the keywords present in the included articles. These 
keywords can inform search terms for trending words used in creativity research to facilitate the 
searching process of articles. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
100 
 
Figure 12. World map of publications of creativity interventions. Color palette: Deep pink 
represents countries with more publications. Number represent frequencies. Retrieved from 
Alves-Oliveira, Xavier, Arriaga, Hoffman, and Paiva (under review). 
 
 
Level of Analysis in Creativity Interventions 
Two independent coders used the coding scheme described in Figure 10 to identify the 
level of analysis of creativity interventions presented in each study included in this systematic 
review. By analyzing Figure 14 we can see that the most stimulated cognitive processing skills 
are idea generation (18%), flexibility (14%), conceptual combination (11%), and idea evaluation 
(11%). By contrast, interventions target less solution monitoring and implementation planning. 
Additionally, the training technique mostly used by the interventions was divergent thinking 
(15%), expressive activities (12%), and elaboration (10%); while the least used were strength 
and weakness identification, constraint identification, and check listing was not used at all. This 
seems to show that interventions for children are mostly dedicated to the stimulation of 
quantities, namely divergent thinking processes, somehow dismissing convergent thinking. Many 
interventions used programmed instruction (31%), discussion (18%), and cooperative learning 
(10%) as a delivery media of the training. On the other hand, novel technologies such as smart 
objects, interactive whiteboards, televisions, games, robots, and cameras were the media used 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
101 
 
Figure 13. Word cloud extracted from the keywords of publications on creativity interventions 
for children. The size of the letters represents frequencies. Retrieved from Alves-Oliveira, 
Xavier, Arriaga, Hoffman, and Paiva (under review). 
 
least frequently, probably because they were non-existent at the time of the early interventions. 
However, these media have become more prominent in recent studies, denoting their potential to 
be included in the interventions with children. Regarding practice exercises, we can see that 
many interventions used imaginative exercises (19%), group exercises (15%), and art exercises 
(14%). While the least chosen interventions were domain-based performance, physical exercises, 
and field exercises. Other exercise types, such as play exercises, had a moderate presence in the 
interventions (6%). 
Many interventions for creativity stimulated variables targeting the creative person (80%) 
while very few programs were dedicated to the creative process (10%) or product (10%). The 
majority of the interventions were conducted in the ambient of the school (92%). Unsurprisingly, 
the most prominent administrators of the interventions were teachers/professors (45%), 
researchers (17%), and facilitators (7%), while parents rarely served in that role (1%). It is 
important to note that many interventions were developed so that children could use them 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
102 
 
Figure 14. Percentage of the attributes of creativity. The color palette varies from deep to 
light pink to show the most used elements. Grey color evidences the least used elements. 
Retrieved from Alves-Oliveira, Xavier, Arriaga, Hoffman, and Paiva (under review). 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
103 
independently without the presence of external administrators (25%). Also, it can be seen that 
many of the programs used both an individual and a group component (42%), with few 
interventions being applied to a child individually (17%). 
Design of Interventions for Creativity 
We further analyzed the design of the interventions for creativity depending on their 
target and on their dimension of the intervention. The full table detailing the codification of each 
intervention for creativity can be seen in Table 1 in OSF8. 
Designing interventions for a specific target. We analyzed how the interventions were 
designed according to their target: the creative person (personal characteristics of individuals), 
the creative process (cognitive processes associated with creativity), or the creative product 
(creative products or outcome of the creative process). We elaborate on the design of 
interventions for each of these three targets. 
Table 7 presents a comprehensive overview of the results, which showed that when the 
target is the creative person, many of the interventions stimulate the cognitive processing skills 
of idea generation, flexibility, and conceptual combination. Additionally, these studies most 
frequently used the training technique of divergent thinking, expressive activities, and 
elaboration. The media they most frequently implemented to deliver the training were 
programmed instruction, discussion, and cooperative learning. The interventions leveraged 
mostly imaginative, group, and classroom exercises; and were mainly performed in the school, 
with a teacher/professor as the administrator. Many interventions were applied to groups of 
 
8Microsoft excel was used to compile Table 1 with the database codification due to its large size. For this reason, 
Table 1 can be accessed in Open Science Framework using the following weblink: https://osf.io/rufz2/ 
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
104 
children or used a mixed context (having exercises for both groups of children and individual 
children), but they were rarely meant to be administered to an individual. 
When the target is the creative process, the results showed that a wider variety of 
cognitive processing skills are being stimulated compared to interventions that target the creative 
person. Therefore, many interventions stimulated problem finding, concept selection, conceptual 
combination, idea generation, and idea evaluation, solution monitoring, information gathering, 
flexibility, and originality. Many interventions for the creative process used convergent thinking, 
critical thinking, feature comparison, divergent thinking, feature listing, analogies, meta-
cognition, and expressive activities. These results also demonstrate the use of more training 
techniques in process-interventions than in person-targeted interventions. The media used to 
deliver the training in process-based interventions was also more diversified; relying on the 
usage of different media, such as programmed instruction, cooperative learning, toys, lectures, 
video and audio tapes, computer exercises, smart objects, robots, interactive whiteboards, and 
games. The types of practice exercises used were imaginative, group, written, classroom, 
computer exercises, play, sensory stimulation, and art exercises. A teacher or researcher usually 
performed the process-targeted interventions in the school, showing a high probability of being 
designed for children to use independently and showing the value of autonomous work in the 
creative process. Finally, most interventions were designed with both group and individual 
activities. 
When the target was the creative product, the results show a similar pattern to process-
targeted interventions, with a wider variety of creative attributes being used in comparison with 
person-targeted interventions. Despite this fact, the creative attributes used were not necessarily 
the same as the ones used in interventions focused on the creative process. Specifically, the 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
105 
cognitive processing skills most frequently targeted were idea generation, idea evaluation, 
flexibility, originality, concept selection, conceptual combination, information gathering, and 
implementation planning. As for the training techniques they were divergent thinking, 
elaboration, analogies, expressive activities, feature comparison, brainstorming, imagery, 
metaphors, and feature listing. Delivery media used by product-targeted interventions were 
programmed instruction, discussion, cooperative learning, computer exercises, interactive 
whiteboards, and handicrafts. Very frequently, the exercises used to deliver the training were 
group, imaginative, classroom, art, written, and self-paced exercises. All of these interventions 
were conducted in the school by a teacher and are designed for independence of use. Finally, and 
similarly to the other interventions, they were mostly applied in both groups and individually, or 
with groups of children. 
Designing interventions according to the dimension of creativity. Interventions also 
seem to be designed differently depending on if they were applied to children in groups or 
individually. Therefore, we now elaborate on the design of the interventions according to the 
dimension in which they were applied to: groups, individual, or mixed. Table 7 presents a more 
comprehensive overview of the results, showing no extreme variations between programs 
delivered for an individual, group, or mixed applications. In fact, for all of these dimensions’ 
idea generation and flexibility were stimulated the most of any of the cognitive skills. The 
training technique that many interventions used was divergent thinking stimulation and 
expressive activities. Programmed instruction was the delivery media used in all the dimensions. 
Regardless of the dimension of the intervention, the target tended to be the creative person. Also 
it was most common for a teacher or a researcher to perform the interventions in a school and 
they encouraged children to use the techniques independently. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
106 
Table 14. Level of analysis of creativity interventions according to the target (person, process, 
product) and the dimension (applied individually, in groups, or both). Retrieved from Alves-
Oliveira, Xavier, Arriaga, Hoffman, and Paiva (under review). 
 
Level of analysis 
Target 
Dimension 
Person 
Process 
Product 
Individual 
Group 
Both 
Cognitive thinking skills 
Problem finding 
9% 
14% 
3% 
12% 
5% 
10% 
Information 
gathering 
10% 
7% 
6% 
4% 
11% 
9% 
Concept selection 
9% 
14% 
12% 
15% 
7% 
10% 
Conceptual 
combination 
11% 
14% 
12% 
12% 
12% 
11% 
Idea generation 
19% 
14% 
15% 
31% 
16% 
16% 
Idea evaluation 
10% 
14% 
15% 
8% 
9% 
12% 
Implementation 
planning 
4% 
0% 
6% 
4% 
6% 
3% 
Solution monitoring 
5% 
10% 
3% 
4% 
6% 
5% 
Flexibility 
15% 
7% 
15% 
8% 
16% 
15% 
Originality 
9% 
7% 
15% 
4% 
12% 
10% 
Training techniques 
Divergent thinking 
15% 
9% 
11% 
21% 
13% 
14% 
Convergent thinking 
4% 
13% 
2% 
6% 
3% 
5% 
Critical thinking 
6% 
13% 
2% 
9% 
5% 
6% 
Meta-cognition 
7% 
6% 
2% 
6% 
7% 
7% 
Ideation 
3% 
3% 
2% 
3% 
3% 
2% 
Elaboration 
10% 
6% 
11% 
12% 
11% 
8% 
Illumination 
2% 
3% 
2% 
3% 
3% 
1% 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
107 
Constraint 
identification 
1% 
0% 
0% 
3% 
0% 
1% 
Strength and 
weakness 
identification 
2% 
0% 
2% 
0% 
2% 
2% 
Feature comparison 
8% 
13% 
9% 
9% 
7% 
9% 
Feature listing 
5% 
9% 
7% 
6% 
6% 
5% 
Analogies 
9% 
9% 
11% 
3% 
9% 
11% 
Check listing 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
Brainstorming 
6% 
3% 
9% 
0% 
8% 
4% 
Imagery 
4% 
3% 
9% 
3% 
3% 
7% 
Metaphors 
6% 
3% 
9% 
0% 
8% 
6% 
Expressive activities 
13% 
6% 
11% 
15% 
12% 
12% 
Delivery media 
Lecture 
3% 
7% 
0% 
0% 
6% 
4% 
Video and audio 
tapes 
4% 
7% 
0% 
7% 
0% 
4% 
Computer exercises 
2% 
7% 
7% 
0% 
3% 
6% 
Individualized 
coaching 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
Programmed 
instruction 
31% 
21% 
36% 
29% 
31% 
28% 
Discussion 
20% 
0% 
21% 
7% 
19% 
22% 
Social modeling 
6% 
0% 
0% 
7% 
8% 
2% 
Behavioral 
modification 
1% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
3% 
0% 
Cooperative learning 
9% 
14% 
21% 
0% 
22% 
6% 
Case-based 
instruction 
8% 
0% 
0% 
7% 
6% 
6% 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
108 
Smart objects 
2% 
7% 
0% 
7% 
0% 
2% 
Robot 
1% 
7% 
0% 
7% 
0% 
0% 
TV 
2% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
Interactive 
whiteboards 
1% 
7% 
7% 
0% 
0% 
4% 
Toys 
4% 
14% 
0% 
21% 
0% 
6% 
Camera 
1% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
2% 
Arts and crafts 
0% 
0% 
7% 
0% 
0% 
2% 
Games 
1% 
7% 
0% 
0% 
3% 
2% 
N/A 
1% 
0% 
0% 
7% 
0% 
0% 
Practice exercises 
Classroom exercises 
13% 
9% 
14% 
12% 
11% 
12% 
Field exercises 
2% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
1% 
2% 
Group exercises 
15% 
14% 
18% 
0% 
20% 
18% 
Domain-based 
performance 
exercises 
3% 
0% 
7% 
9% 
0% 
3% 
Computer exercises 
2% 
9% 
4% 
3% 
1% 
3% 
Written exercises 
6% 
14% 
11% 
3% 
4% 
9% 
Self-paced exercises 
8% 
5% 
11% 
18% 
7% 
8% 
Imaginative 
exercises 
19% 
18% 
18% 
21% 
19% 
18% 
Sensorial stimulation 
8% 
9% 
0% 
12% 
4% 
8% 
Physical exercises 
5% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
9% 
2% 
Art exercises 
14% 
9% 
14% 
9% 
17% 
13% 
Play 
6% 
14% 
4% 
12% 
7% 
5% 
Target 
Person 
100% 
0% 
0% 
89% 
88% 
67% 
Process 
0% 
100% 
0% 
11% 
0% 
19% 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
109 
Product 
0% 
0% 
100% 
0% 
13% 
14% 
Press or environment 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
Ambient 
Laboratory or 
university 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
Public spaces 
5% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
7% 
5% 
Home 
2% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
5% 
School 
91% 
80% 
100% 
88% 
93% 
91% 
N/A 
2% 
20% 
0% 
13% 
0% 
0% 
Administrator 
Researcher 
18% 
14% 
13% 
25% 
5% 
19% 
Facilitator 
8% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
16% 
6% 
Psychologist 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
Teacher/professor 
43% 
43% 
63% 
25% 
63% 
44% 
Parent 
2% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
3% 
Children 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
Independence of use 
23% 
43% 
25% 
50% 
16% 
25% 
N/A 
5% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
3% 
Dimension 
Group 
34% 
0% 
40% 
0% 
100% 
0% 
Individual 
20% 
20% 
0% 
100% 
0% 
0% 
Both 
34% 
80% 
60% 
0% 
0% 
100% 
N/A 
12% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
 
 
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
110 
Discussion 
In this work, we contributed with the design, development, and validation of a coding 
scheme due to the need to systematize levels of analysis of creativity interventions. Our coding 
scheme provides a basic nomenclature to ground the structure of the desired intervention for 
creativity and therefore has the potential to inform the design, development, and validation of 
new interventions/programs. In this sense, designers of creativity interventions can choose 
between different levels of analysis according to what attribute of creativity is meant to be 
stimulated, what technique to use, which media to apply, etc. This enables the development of 
interventions that have a clear target and goal. It also supports the understanding of existing 
intervention programs and guides practitioners in the choice of the most appropriate program to 
apply. Furthermore, the classification of interventions based on their level of analysis facilitates 
replication and reproducibility of programs. However, this also means that caution should be 
used when comparing the efficacy of interventions that stimulate different attributes of creativity. 
Despite this reservation this coding scheme facilitates cross-validation of effectiveness between 
programs. 
An additional advantage of the coding scheme relates with the easiness of interpreting the 
results and placing them in the current state of the art in creativity research. For example, we can 
see that most of the interventions for creativity have been targeting divergent thinking and idea 
generation while less has been dedicated to convergent thinking and implementation planning 
training. While the term “creativity” shares the same root as create, it implies something beyond 
the creation of new ideas but also a synthesis into a useful solution; that is generating ideas and 
then culling and converging those ideas into a viable, useful solution. As such, it seems that more 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
111 
interventions that blend convergent and divergent thinking are needed. As Kaufman (2018b) puts 
it, “most empirical studies emphasize how to increase creativity rather than explore its possible 
benefits.” (pp. 734). 
This coding scheme included different emergent levels of analysis that are being brought 
from the field of technology to the field of creativity, e.g., robots, smart objects, computers. 
Although these examples were not the most common ones, mainly because our search includes a 
broad range of years and in early years some of the technology was non-existing, we can see 
there is a trend in the use of novel technologies for stimulating creativity. Moreover, they are 
associated with positive effects in the creativity levels of children (Pires, Alves-Oliveira, 
Arriaga, & Martinho, 2017). 
Implications for Practice and Policymaking in Creativity Research 
First, social interactions are beneficial for creativity stimulation in children. Our findings 
revealed that most interventions and programs for creativity were conducted within groups of 
children or have a mixed dimension (including both individual and group tasks). This seems to 
show the importance of stimulating the social dimension of creativity in children in which 
creations are made during interactions, collaborations, and exchange of ideas (Paulus & Nijstad, 
2003; Tadmor, Satterstrom, Jang, & Polzer, 2012). 
Second, school is the primary locus for creativity training. Indeed, the most common 
ambient or environment where interventions are conducted in the school setting. This means that 
an intervention in a location that is familiar to children helps them to express their creative 
potential. Safe and natural environments appear connected with positive creative work, such as 
divergent thinking stimulation and mental transformations (Jones, 2013). 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
112 
Third, teachers are a cornerstone for developing creativity in children. In almost all of the 
interventions, teachers or professors were the most common administrators of creative training. 
However, as our results demonstrate, teachers and professors frequently lack proper training in 
delivering creativity interventions (see the limitations column in Table 4). This leads to 
inconsistencies in delivering the training and thus, results are hindered. Furthermore, Collard and 
Looney (2014) systematized a list of barriers in creativity education, mentioning the importance 
of teacher training and curricula accommodation for creativity tasks. 
Fourth, the personalization of creativity interventions seems to matter. When 
interventions or programs are designed to target the creative process or the creative product, they 
are richer in their structure. That is, the training is more diversified, compared with interventions 
that target the creative person. For example, they include the stimulation of more types of 
cognitive processing skills and use more training techniques. The drawback of this diversity 
implies that it can be harder to understand what attributes of creativity if being responsible for 
the effectiveness of the program. In this sense, programs targeting the creative person are more 
focused and might a good option to demonstrate the efficacy of a given program. 
Fifth, creativity interventions should go beyond test-like activities. As shown by our 
results, programmed instruction is the delivery media more frequently used in all interventions 
and programs. This means that the intervention is highly based on concrete instructions for 
children, which translates into programs that resemble evaluation tests rather than creative 
activities that can inspire creativity in children. Given the importance of play in children’s 
development, alternative programs with playful attributes should be considered (Davies et al., 
2013). For this, additional ways to measure creativity such as behavioral and verbal analysis 
(with a validated coding scheme that defines what creative behaviors can be coded), are 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
113 
particularly useful when the target group of the intervention are young children (Said-Metwaly, 
Van den Noortgate, & Kyndt, 2017) and should be explored further. 
Sixth, opportunities for autonomy are opportunities for creativity. One of the most 
surprising results that emerged was the discovery of multiple interventions that placed children 
as independent users of the training, not needing external administrators. Given that autonomy 
and independence are two variables highly associated with creative individuals it is not 
surprising that these lead to behaviors of exploration, curiosity, and experimentation in children 
(Feist, 1999; Rejskind, 1982). Therefore, providing programs that empower children in their 
autonomy is beneficial for creativity outcomes. We believe that new technological media, such 
as robots, computers, and smart objects, can facilitate autonomy in creativity. This can be 
achieved by having tasks focused on children, such as the assembly of a robot with child-friendly 
instructions (e.g., LEGO Mindstorms) or the use of a computer to program a robot (e.g., LOGO 
programming environment developed by Papert (1980)). Additionally, our results show that 
interventions focused on autonomy were mostly group-based interventions, demonstrating how 
beneficial group interactions are for collective creativity. 
Conclusion 
At some point in life everyone can be creative. Creativity is an ability that seems to 
benefit personal growth, as well as to be a boon to society (Sternberg & Lubart, 1996). However, 
there seems to be a decline in creative abilities in some key-developmental stages (such as during 
childhood). To bridge this gap with existing efforts for creativity development, this systematic 
review had two main contributions: collect and summarize evidence of interventions and 
programs for creativity dedicated to children, and the proposal of an extended coding scheme 
that can be used to understand different levels of analysis of creativity interventions. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
114 
Our systematic review of programs for creativity spams 68 years of research. We have 
started our search with a poll of 3613 articles, and our final list of included studies includes 48 of 
these articles, selected using the PRISMA-P guidelines for systematic reviews (Moher et al., 
2015). Our results include the description of the studies included, as well as a detailed analysis of 
the intervention programs for children. We concluded that although efforts are being made to 
develop new programs for children, showing promising levels of effectiveness, more research is 
required and new programs for creativity should be designed and validated given current 
limitations. 
To evaluate the interventions, we have developed a coding scheme with different levels 
of analysis of creativity interventions. These levels of analysis include a detailed description of 
which cognitive processing skills are being stimulated by the interventions, what training 
techniques are applied, which media is being used, what exercises are being practiced, what is 
the target and the administrator of the intervention, in which ambient the training takes places, 
and in which social dimension training is being applied. Each of these concepts was associated 
with a definition, thus facilitating clarity in creativity nomenclature. This coding scheme is 
therefore called “Taxonomy of Creativity Interventions” and is meant to be broadly used to 
either design new creativity programs, apply existing ones, or compare efficacy between 
interventions. 
Limitations and Recommendation for Future Research 
“Nurturing young children’s creative potential is not frivolous. It stands at the center of 
preparing children for life” (Kemple & Nissenberg, 2000). Although this was an extensive 
systematic review that covered many years of research in the field of creativity, there are some 
limitations that need to be addressed. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
115 
As demonstrated by the results, the majority of the programs included in this systematic 
review had a positive impact on creativity. This means that little is known about programs and 
interventions that did not impact creativity work. This occurred mainly due to the file drawer 
problem (Rosenthal, 1979) that we have tried to address by contacting several authors and 
experts in the field. However, overall, we did not find enough supporting results for programs 
that are hindering creativity. That said, having a repository of knowledge about elements that 
hinder creativity allows curriculum designers to have a list of what not to include (Kaufman, 
2018c). All in all, additional programs or interventions for creativity seem to be welcome. As 
Mumford (2003) stated, there is still space for the developments that focuses on practical 
innovation that takes into account cross-field differences in the nature of creative thought, and 
that combines the effects of creativity on people and social systems. 
Domain differences, such as mathematical-logical and verbal-symbolic, among others, 
also play a role in differences in creativity expression (Baer, 2015; Baer & Kaufman, 2005; 
Kaufman & Baer, 2004, 2005; Lubart & Guignard, 2004; Plucker & Beghetto, 2004; Silvia, 
Kaufman, & Pretz, 2009). While this work did not analyze domains differences in creativity 
interventions, future work should describe programs in terms of the domain that is being 
stimulated. Additionally, a large number of interventions considered no intervention for a control 
condition in a randomized, controlled trial to avoid the Hawthorne effect (McCarney et al., 
2007). 
Finally, this work does not include articles that only provided qualitative results. In this 
sense, we viewed creativity as an end-goal. However, to fully understand the benefits of 
creativity it should be more closely examined in light of qualitative results. Also, more emphasis 
should be placed on the creative process and creative meanings (Kaufman, 2018a). In future 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
116 
work, broadening the scope of the search could provide a more holistic overview of other efforts 
being made in this field of research. 
Highlights 
• Review of evidence about the effectiveness of interventions for creativity dedicated 
to children. 
• Transferability of knowledge by using the Taxonomy of Creative Interventions to 
other creativity efforts. 
• Understanding about the enduring impact of current interventions to inform the 
design of new interventions. 
Implications for this thesis 
This systematic review was a steppingstone into the state of the art in creativity research. 
It enabled us to better understand what the current limitations are and how we can robotic 
technology as a tool for creativity-provoking interventions. Specifically, one of the main 
limitations in current interventions is the lack of personalization among the activities developed 
to stimulate creativity in children. Most of the activities miss essential elements of children’s 
world, such as fun, imagination, and play. We took this as an opportunity to use robots for fun 
and decided to create a toy-like robot that children could play and through the interaction with 
the robot, creative abilities would be nurtured. To date, there is no study whose main goal is to 
design a child-robot interaction that praises play as a form of unleashing creativity. In Chapter 5 
we detail how we have designed, fabricated, and programmed a robot that can support this 
intervention model.  
This systematic review also sheds light on best practices among existing creativity 
interventions. There is an emphasis on the benefits of conducting these interventions in familiar 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
117 
places for children. Indeed, creative places are safe places as they honor explorations and 
empower new experimentations without fear (Ross, 2010). This led us to conduct our studies 
across different child places, such as schools, summer camps, and children’s museums. An 
additional insight from this systematic review was the positive gains in developing interventions 
that children could take ownership, as autonomy is positively correlated with creativity. Towards 
this end, instead of imposing a new activity for children to learn, we integrated the intervention 
in activities that children already practice and enjoy. We have therefore chosen to focus on 
unstructured play and storytelling.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
118 
Chapter 4. Activities with robots to unlock creative potentials 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Alves-Oliveira, P., Arriaga, P., Ibérico Nogueira, S., Hoffman, G., Paiva, A., & Bispo, A. (2017). 
Designing and Programming Robots to Unlock Creativity. Paper presented at the 17th 
International Conference on: Excellence, Innovation, & Creativity in Basic-Higher 
Education & Psychology. Lisbon, Portugal, ICIE, Lisbon, Portugal. (this submission 
contained 33% of the data collected). 
Alves-Oliveira, P., Arriaga, P., Hoffman, G., Paiva, A. (Manuscript in preparation). Designing 
and Coding Robots to Unlock Creative Potentials. International Journal of Child-Computer 
Interaction.
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
119 
Abstract 
Robots have massively been introduced in children’s lives, showing promising effects on 
education and learning. Parallel to this, children’s creative levels show a decline related to 
different factors, including the standardized teaching and learning dynamics present in traditional 
school systems. This work aims to investigate if the activities with robots introduced in school 
have an effect on children’s creativity levels. To study this, we compared creative levels of 
children across three study conditions: (1) Experimental condition 1: Children performed 
STEAM activities in school by learning how to code robots; (2) Experimental condition 2: 
children performed STEAM activities by learning how to design robots; (3) Control condition:  
Children engaged in a music class. We applied the Test for Creative Thinking-Drawing 
Production (TCT-DP), a validated test that measures creative potential, before and after the 
intervention. Our results showed that creativity levels of children increased from pre- to post-
testing, showing the effect of all intervention groups in potentiating creativity. Additionally, 
results showed that creative levels were significantly higher in the control condition. This result 
was expected since this condition consisted of an artistic musical intervention where creativity is 
foreseen to be stimulated. When analyzing the effects of the interventions on the two dimensions 
of TCT-DP (i.e., adaptiveness and innovativeness), results showed that both the control and the 
coding condition stimulated innovativeness, with moderate effect size for code condition and 
small effect size for control. This result seems to show the strong relationship between this 
intervention and the stimulation of non-conventional ways of thinking. This study contributes to 
understanding the effects of using robots for children. 
Keywords: creativity, social robots, STEM, art
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
120 
 
Theoretical Background 
We now review the literature on activities with robots for children that are already being 
used in schools and how they relate to creativity expression.  
Robotic Activities for Children 
Digital competence, a skill highly related to STEM activities and robotics, was elected 
one of the eight basic competences of the European Reference Framework of key competences 
for lifelong learning (European Communities, 2007). Digital competence is defined as an 
awareness and a capacity of people to properly use digital tools to identify, access, integrate, 
manage or evaluate digital resources (Martin, 2005b). It is a competence that has been therefore 
included in the school curriculum in many countries, especially developing countries. This meant 
also that teachers had to include in their preparation didactic activities in which digital 
technologies are used to teach children to learn about other curricular concepts. It has been 
extensively recognized that experiential, hands-on educational activities provide higher 
motivation for learning new material, by providing real-world meaning to the otherwise abstract 
knowledge (Donohue, 2014; Mataric, Koenig, & Feil-Seifer, 2007). To contribute to this hands-
on learning and growing, robotics has been shown to be a novel but promising tool to generate 
interest, motivation, and learning in topics of Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math 
(STEM). 
This ability to learn concepts about curricular topics (e.g., math) through the use of 
robotics, was coined by Seymour Papert (Papert, 1980). The main idea was to teach children to 
learn how the computer thinks so they could learn about their thinking. Towards his goal, he 
developed LOGO, one of the earliest programming languages for children (Papert, 1999). To 
enable children to see the product of their coding, he developed the LOGO Turtle, a robot that 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
121 
would respond to children’s commands and that would enable children to see the impact of their 
understanding about concepts by viewing it reflected on the robot (Solomon, & Papert, 1976) 
Education, like other social sectors, is rapidly adopting electronic means (Martin, 2005b). As this 
was a successful teaching technique, the programming language continued to be improved and 
gave origin to Scratch, a programming language of building blocks pervasively present in robotic 
kits for children so they learn how to code (Resnick, Martin, Sargent, & Silverman, 1996). 
Robotics Activities and Creativity 
Given the success of robotics in learning acquisitions, education started to rapidly adopt 
technology to bring new ways of learning in school (Ibáñez, & Delgado-Kloos, 2018). During 
STEM activities, children are active builders of their learning. Usually, these activities have an 
interpersonal nature and children are organized in small groups to solve a problem and lean with 
each other. By looking at the cognitive processes that are involved in STEM activities, one could 
say they incorporate processes that are relevant for creative thinking (Harms, Kennel, & Reiter-
Palmon, 2017). Researchers have recognized this connection and several studies already 
evaluated if creativity levels increase with STEM activities, showing promising results (e.g., 
Conradty, & Bogner, 2018). However, little is known on how children perform in STEM-like 
activities (such as coding and designing robots) compared to artistic classes which are known to 
stimulate creativity with certainty (Liikanen, 1975). As such, a study performed by Ritter and 
Ferguson (2017) showed that listening to music, especially happy music, increases levels of both 
convergent and divergent thinking. Songwriting is an activity that also appears to be related to 
creativity reasoning in both teenagers (Arbuthnott, & Sutter, 2019) and children (Sarrazin, 2016). 
Additionally, being playing an instrument is also associated with an increase in creativity levels 
of children (Kokotsaki, 2016). 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
122 
Our Contribution 
STEM activities place clearly defined problems for children to solve. While children 
become efficient in acquiring a mindset for solving clear problems, they can have a harder time 
solving problems that are ill-defined (Moreau, & Engeset, 2016). Some literature exists on the 
influence of STEM activities in children’s creative thinking (e.g., (Ibáñez, & Delgado-Kloos, 
2018). In this work, we aim to expand this line of research by incorporating activities whose goal 
is not so clear but is still related to robotics learning. Therefore, in this work, we extend the line 
of research about STEM and creativity by studying how the impact of children designing a robot 
on their creative levels. Designing a robot, without actually needing to code it, can stimulate 
fantasy thinking. Additionally, there are infinite ways that children can use to design a robot, all 
of them equally correct, which makes this a more open-ended task than the ones presented during 
STEM. Therefore, the main contribution of this work is to assess, using validated measures of 
creativity, the impact that coding and designing a robot has on children’s creative thinking. 
Additionally, we provide comparisons with a control group that consisted of a creative musical 
class, providing a fair comparison in terms of the impact on creativity levels. 
Goal, Hypothesis, and Research Question 
The main goal of this study was to investigate if existing activities for children that 
include robots (either real robots or designing a future robot) increase the creativity levels of 
children in comparison with artistic activities. Given this goal, the specific hypothesis for this 
study is that coding a robot (traditional STEM) and having musical classes will provide increases 
in the creativity of children. We consider that designing a robot an exploratory condition as little 
is known about the effects of design in children’s creativity.  
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
123 
Therefore, we considered the following experimental conditions: i) experimental 
condition of coding robots: children learned how to code robots according to pre-defined 
activities; ii) experimental condition of designing robots: children learned how to design 
behaviors for robot prototypes without needing to code the behaviors; iii) control condition: 
children engaged in a music class. As such, the research question for this study is can activities 
with robots increase children’s creative abilities compared to artistic activities of music? 
Method 
Participants  
To estimate the sample size required for this study, an a priori power analysis was 
conducted using G*Power3 (Faul, Erdfelder, Lang, & Buchner, 2007). We considered the 
comparison of three independent groups using an Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) with repeated 
measures (pre-posttest), a medium effect size (f = 0.25), alpha of .05, power of .70, and a strong 
correlation between variables (r = .80). This power analysis showed that a total sample of 114 
participants would be required. 
A total sample of 150 children were involved in this study. The distribution of the 
participants across conditions was the following: eight participants were involved in the pilot 
testing, 43 were allocated in the code condition, 43 in the design condition, and 56 in the control 
condition. Three participants were excluded: one participant was excluded as he was diagnosed 
with autism spectrum disorder; however, the participant was involved in the experimental 
activities to avoid feelings of exclusion as the study was conducted in an inclusive school where 
children with special needs learn and play together with typically developing children. Two 
participants did not fill in the post-test, which made it impossible to analyze the effects of the 
intervention. Three different schools were involved in this study and each study condition was  
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
124 
Table 8. Sample demographics, including gender, age, and grade distribution across conditions. 
  
Total  
(N = 140) 
Code 
condition 
(N = 41) 
Design 
condition 
(N = 43) 
Control 
condition 
(N = 56) 
Tests 
Gender 
75F, 73M 
18F, 23M 
22F, 21M 
32F, 24M !22(2, N = 140) = 1.66, p = .435  
    Female 
75 
18 
22 
32 
 
    Male 
73 
23 
21 
24 
 
Age (M, SD; Min-Max) 
7.89, 1.51; 
6-10 
7.63, 1.34; 
6-10 
7.87, 1.26; 
6-10 
8.05, .80; 
7-9 
F(2,133) = 1.661, p = .194 
Grade  
 
 
 
 
!22(2, N = 140) = 31.85, p < 
.001  
Moderate/Good 
86 
12 
26 
48 
 
Very Good/ Excellent 
54 
29 
17 
8 
 
 
performed in a different school. 
A detailed description containing the demographics for each group is presented in Table 
8. This table includes the distribution of children by condition, taking into account their gender, 
age, and grade. We used the grading system for Portuguese schools in which children are 
evaluated at the end of the semester with Poor, Moderate/Good, and Very Good/Excellent. 
Excluded participants and participants involved in the pilot testing were not included in the main 
analysis for this study. 
Measures 
We used the Test for Creative Thinking-Drawing Production (TCT-DP) to measure 
creativity at pre- and post-test levels using Forms A and B. TCT-DP is a well-established test in 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
125 
the field of creativity, applicable to persons of a broad age range, including children; it is culture-
fair and helps to identify high creative potentials as well as low creative, neglected, and poorly 
developed ones (Jellen, & Urban,1986,1989; Urban, 2005. This test has been validated for the 
Portuguese adult population (Almeida, & Nogueira, 2010) and normative values were calculated 
for the young population (Nogueira, Almeida, & Lima, 2017c). 
The TCT-DP test consists of a sheet of paper with six graphic elements of a circle, a dot, 
a dashed line, a 90-degree angle, a curved line, and a small open square, that are placed at fixed 
and pre-established locations on the page. All of the elements, except for the small open square, 
are enclosed in a large rectangular frame, and this forms a short of an incomplete drawing. The 
locations of the graphic elements are mirrored in the Form B compared to the Form A. 
Participants are instructed to “complete the drawing that an artist started but has not finished” 
(see the full transcription of the instructions in Appendix A). Collected drawings were coded 
according to a 14-point scoring system explained below (Urban & Jellen, 1996). 
1. Continuations - Number of graphic elements used among the initial elements proposed; 
2. Completions - Number of graphic elements used in a meaningful way; 
3. New Elements - Number of new items added to the composition; 
4. Connections with lines - Number of contacts established between the initial graphic 
elements; 
5. Connections made that contribute to a theme - Degree to which the elements were 
connected thematically; 
6. Boundary-breaking being fragment-dependent - Use of the element outside the frame; 
7. Boundary-breaking being fragment-independent - Use of added elements outside the 
frame; 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
126 
8. Perspective - Use of three-dimensional drawing techniques; 
9. Humor, affectivity/emotionality/expressive power of the drawing - Creation of a 
humorist or emotional atmosphere; 
10. Unconventionality A - Unconventional manipulation of the paper; 
11. Unconventionality B - Use of abstract, surrealistic, fictional and/or symbolic themes; 
12. Unconventionality C - Use of words, numbers, and/or cartoon-like elements; 
13. Unconventionality D - Non-stereotypical utilization of fragments of figures. 
14. Speed - Time for completion of the drawing. Speed response time is recorded; this was 
not possible for this sample because it was administered to a large group at one time. This 
procedure occurred in previous application of the TCT-DP, including applications made 
by the developers of this scale, suggesting that speed might not be a required variable to 
assess creative potential using TCT-DP (Dollinger, Urban, & James, 2004). 
We started by exploring the presence of extreme values at baseline (pre-test values of TCT-
DP). Results showed no extreme value and thus, no presence of outliers. TCT-DP test was also 
analyzed taking into account the two dimensions of Adaptiveness and Innovativeness (Nogueira, 
Almeida, & Lima, 2017a,b). Internal consistency of Adaptiveness and Innovativeness revealed to 
be good (⍺ = .80 and .78, respectively). Internal consistency was also calculated at the pre- and 
post-test. Reliability was shown to have adequate values, indicating that our items are related and 
contribute to unique information (Streiner, 2003). We performed independent Analyses of 
Variance (ANOVAs), instead of one-way Multivariate Analysis of Variance (MANOVA) since 
these two dimensions are strongly correlated (pretest), r(140) = .63, p < .001. Moreover, 
ANOVA is considered to be robust for normality assumption violations, especially in the cases 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
127 
of large sample sizes, p > 100, and similarly sized groups (Blanca, Alarcón, Arnau, Bono, & 
Bendayan, 2017). 
Two coders coded independently 30% of the data to establish an inter-coder agreement. Data 
was selected by using a website for randomizing lists9 and coders were blinded to the study 
condition. Cohen's k was run to determine if the agreement after reconciliation between two 
coders on the analysis of Adaptiveness and Innovativeness of TCT-DP at pre- and post-test 
levels. There was a strong agreement on adaptiveness at both pre-teste, k = .89 (95% CI, 1.03, -
0.75), p < .001, and post-test, k = .85 (95% CI, 1.01, -.69), p < .001. There was agreement on 
innovativeness at pre-test, k = .617 (95% CI, .82, - 0.41), p < .001, and a fair agreement at post-
test, k = .329 (95% CI, .53, -.11), p < .001 (Altman, 1990; Landis & Koch, 1977). 
Procedure 
Participants whose parents had signed the consent form to participate in this study were 
invited to fill in a brief sociodemographic questionnaire that contained a question about their age 
and gender. Note that the grades of children, also collected in the scope of this study, were 
provided by the schoolteachers at the end of the study. Afterward, the TCT-DP Form A was 
handed to children. We initiated the intervention when all children filled in the test. 
Children included in the experimental condition of coding a robot had the main task of 
learning to use Scratch language (Resnick et al., 2009) to give commands to the Dash and Dot 
robot10 (see Figure 15). Children worked in small groups of 3-4 and were instructed to program a 
mail-delivery robot. This task consisted of writing lines of code to make the robot go from point 
A to point B, which were pre-defined in locations of the classroom (see Figure 15). Children  
 
9 Randomizer website: https://www.random.org/ 
10 Dash and Dot robots by Ardozia: https://ardozia.com/robots/ 
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
128 
 
Figure 15. On the left: Close up on the Dash robot used in the code condition. On the right: 
Children using a tablet with Scratch programming language to code the Dash robot. 
 
developed knowledge of geometric and mathematics since they had to make the robot turn (and 
thus, understand angles and distances). The activity lasted 45min and is a typical STEM task 
included in schools. 
Children included in the experimental condition of designing a robot were instructed to 
think about different personalities for the robot, without needing to code the robot. To develop a 
personality for a robot, we relied on the Big Five Model of Personality, also entitled as the Five 
Factor Model developed by McCrae and Costa (McCrae, & Costa Jr, 1997), and on the 
correspondent NEO Personality Inventory Revised (NEO PI-R). In this model, personality is 
described according to five factors (Extraversion, Agreeableness, Conscientiousness, 
Neuroticism, and Openness to experience), each of these factors is a continuum with an opposing 
pole (Costa, & McCrae, 2010) encompassing several traits. Thus, Extraversion corresponds to a 
dimension that includes traits such as sociable, talkative, assertive, energetic; Agreeableness 
relates with good-natured, cooperative and trustful characteristics; Conscientiousness concerns 
with a disposition for control, self-discipline, and responsible; 
 
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
129 
Table 9. Personality dimensions according to the Big Five Model of Personality (left column). 
Adaptation of the terminology for children (right column). 
 
Personality dimensions (and opposing poles) 
Adaptation of terminology for children 
Neuroticism (vs. Emotional stability) 
Not used in this study 
Extraversion (vs. Introversion)  
Social (vs. Shy) 
Openness (vs. Closedness to experience) 
Imaginative (vs. Flat) 
Agreeableness (vs. Antagonism) 
Kind (vs. Grumpy) 
Conscientiousness (vs. Lack of direction) 
Not used in this study 
 
Neuroticism includes traits such as nervous, unstable, and insecure; and Openness to experience 
with intellectual, imaginative, insightful, and curious traits (John, & Srivastava, 1999). The 
dimensions chosen for this activity with children were Extraversion and Agreeableness because 
they are the ones that are more related to the social facets of personality and, therefore, the ones 
that could be better captured in a social interaction with a robot. Also, we also selected Openness 
to experience because it includes traits related to creativity and we aimed to explore how 
children designed for this trait. As this terminology is very unfamiliar to children and used more 
technically within psychology, we adapted the trait concepts by using adjectives that were  
understandable for children. Therefore, Social and Shy to represented Extraversion and 
Introversion, Kind and Grumpy represented Agreeableness and Antagonism, and Imaginative 
and Flat represented Openness and Closeness to experience, and (see Table 9). This was the 
terminology used with children. Children were then assigned to produce movements for the 
personality dimensions using a low fidelity robot prototype in the form of a cube (see Figure 16). 
Children worked in small groups of 3-4 and were responsible for producing the movement for 
each personality trait together (see Figure 16). 
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
130 
 
Figure 16. On the left: Paper prototypes of robots used in the design condition were made using 
origami techniques and each cube was built with a mechanism that integrates a crayon inside so 
that children could represent the movements of the robot by drawing them in large paper sheets. 
We embed a crayon in one of the cube faces was a design methodology that motivated children 
to represent the robot’s movements in a 2D space, avoiding movements in a 3D plane (such as 
flying and jumping) as real robots are not able to do so. On the right: Example of a trajectory 
performed by a child. 
 
Children included in the control condition took a music class where they were invited to 
learn a new song and sing it. Additionally, children played instruments, such as the flute and 
performed musical rhythms using their bodies as instruments. The control condition for this 
study consisted of a creative activity to provide a fair baseline to the other two experimental 
conditions. When the activities were finished, children were invited to complete Form B of the 
TCT-DP with a similar instruction as the one provided for Form A. 
Results 
Effects of Group Conditions on Creativity  
To compare the three group conditions (code, design, and control) on creativity (global, 
adaptiveness, and innovation) as a function of the phase (pre- and post-test), three independent 
two-way mixed analyses of variance (ANOVAs) 3 (groups: Code, Design, Control) X 2 (phase: 
pre-test, post-test) were conducted. 
Results for the overall creativity scores showed a main effect of the phase, F(1, 137) = 
11.89, p < .001, ηp2 = .08, indicating that creativity increased from the pre-test 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
131 
Table 10. Values of TCT-DP according to study conditions at the pre- and post-test, compared to 
normative values for the Portuguese population (Nogueira, Almeida, & Lima, 2017c). 
 
 
Code 
Design 
Control 
Normative values 7-8 
years old 
Normative values 8-9 
years old 
TCT-DP pre-test 
(M, SD) 
16.05, 
9.68 
16.23, 
9.16 
22.36, 
11.66 
23.3, 9.90 
18.4, 8.00 
TCT-DP post-test 
(M, SD) 
21.39, 
9.01 
16.74, 
9.05 
25.14, 
11.60 
23.3, 9.90 
18.4, 8.00 
 
 
(M = 18.26, SE = 0.88) to the post-test (M = 20.92, SE = 0.86). Additionally, the results showed 
a main effect of the group, F(2, 137) = 7.91, p < .001, ηp2 = .10, indicating that participants in the 
control condition presented higher creativity scores (M = 23.59, SE = 1.22) than participants in 
the design condition (M = 16.49, SE = 1.39), p < .001, and in the code condition (M = 18.68, SE 
= 1.43), p = .01. No significant differences were found between the code and the design 
conditions, p = .273. Additionally, we compared the mean values of the TCT-DP test to the 
normative values for this population. As we can see by looking at Table 10, the values are in line 
with the norm for the Portuguese population (Nogueira, Almeida, & Lima, 2017c). 
Results also showed that the difference between groups was present at baseline, 
suggesting that the control group was already higher in creativity potential before the 
intervention. Moreover, the interaction between the group condition and phase, F(1, 137) = 3.08, 
p = .049, ηp2 = .04, indicated that the statistically significant increase in post-test from baseline 
was only found for the code group, F(1, 137) = 14.21, p < .001, ηp2 = .09. For the other groups, 
the scores after the intervention were relatively similar to the baseline, ps > .05. Given the 
imbalance between groups in the creativity scores at pre-test, an additional one-way ANOVA 
was conducted to adjust for this baseline difference, by using a change score between the post- 
and the pre-test scores (higher scores correspond to higher increase from baseline). The overall  
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
132 
 
Figure 17. Changes of TCT-DP global scores from baseline to post-intervention as a function of 
group condition, *p < .05. 
 
results of the one-way ANOVA was significant, F(2, 137) = 3.08, p = .049, ηp2 = .04. The 
comparison between each level revealed that the creativity increase in the code group was 
significantly higher (∆M = 5.32; ∆SE = 1.41) than the increase in the design group (∆M = 0.51; 
∆SE = 1.38), t(137) = 2.44, p = .016, but no statistical differences were found between these 
groups and the control condition (∆M = 2.14; ∆SE = 1.21), ps > .05 (see Figure 17). 
To better understand this decrease, we computed the means for each item of the TCT-DP 
considering the change in the scores between the pre- and post-tests. Results showed that the 
design group decreased creativity performance compared to baseline on the items CTH, PE, HU, 
and UCD and maintained the performance on the UCC item; the code group decreased creativity 
performance only on the HU item and maintained the performance on the BFI item; while the 
control group decreased creativity performance on the CM, UCB, and UCD items (see Figure 18 
for a visual on these means).  
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
133 
 
Figure 18. Difference between pre- and post-testing for each TCT-DP item. Items detail: CN - 
Continuations, CM - Completions, BFD - Boundary breaking being fragment dependent, BFI - 
Boundary breaking being fragment independent, NE - New elements, CTH - Connections made 
that contribute to a theme, PE - Perspective, HU - Humor, UCA - Unconventional manipulations, 
UCB - Symbolic, abstract, fictional, UCC - Symbol-figure combinations, UCD - Non-
stereotypical utilization of fragments/figures. 
 
The ANOVA 3 X 2 results for adaptiveness also showed a main effect of phase, 
indicating an increase in the adaptiveness scores from pre-test (M = 8.85, SE = 0.39) to the post-
tests (M = 9.70, SE = 0.42), F(1, 137) = 5.52, p = .02, ηp2 = .04. Again, we found higher scores on 
creativity in the control group compared to the other two groups. However, because these results 
were also found at baseline, we adjusted for this baseline imbalance, by using a change score 
between the post from the pre-test scores and running an additional one-way ANOVA. The 
results from this analysis revealed that the three groups were relatively similar in the increase in 
adaptiveness after the intervention, F(2, 137) = 0.48, p = .621, ηp2 = .01 (see Table 11). 
 
 
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
134 
Table 11. Mean values of TCT-DP dimensions adaptiveness and innovativeness across groups.  
 
 
Code 
Design 
Control 
TCT-DP Adaptiveness pre-test (M, SD) 
7.78, 4.48 
7.86, 3.88 
10.91, 5.15 
TCT-DP Adaptiveness post-test (M, SD) 
9.07, 4.17 
8.65, 4.24 
11.36, 5.78 
TCT-DP innovativeness pre-test (M, SD) 
8.24, 6.77 
8.37, 6.77 
11.61, 7.99 
TCT-DP Innovativeness post-test (M, SD) 
12.27, 7.48 
8.09, 6.47 
13.48, 7.98 
 
Regarding innovativeness, results also showed an increase from the pre-test (M = 9.41, 
SE = 0.62) to the post-test (M = 11.28, SE = 0.63), F(1, 137) = 11.28, p = .001, ηp2  = .08.  The 
interaction between phase and group showed a significant increase from baseline in both the 
control, F(1, 137) = 4.60, p = .034, ηp2  = .03, and the code conditions, F(1, 137) = 15.53, p < 
.001, ηp2  = .10. Similar to the results on adaptiveness, we found higher baseline scores on 
creativity in the control group compared to the other two groups. Thus, we adjusted for this 
imbalance by using a change score between the post from the pre-test. An additional one-way 
ANOVA using this change score in creativity levels revealed differences between conditions, 
F(2, 137) = 4.55, p = .012, ηp2 = .06, and in particular between the code group (∆M = 4.02; ∆SE = 
1.02) and the design group (∆M = -0.28; ∆SE = 1.00), t(137) = 3.02, p = .003. No statistical 
differences were found between these two groups and the control condition (∆M = 1.88; ∆SE = 
0.87), ps > .05 (see Figure 19). 
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
135 
 
Figure 19. Changes of TCT-DP innovativeness scores from baseline to post-intervention as a 
function of group condition, *p < .05. 
 
Discussion 
The main aim of this study was to examine if creativity increased when children 
performed activities using robots (designing and coding robots) compared to an artistic music 
class. Children’s creativity was measured using the TCT-DP test, which measures graphic-
figural creativity in two dimensions of the creative thought: adaptiveness (related to conventional 
thinking) and innovativeness (related to non-conventional thinking). Results were analyzed 
taking into account the global score of TCT-DP and each dimension. 
Regarding the global score of creativity, results showed an increase from pre- to post-test 
in all conditions. This result indicates a positive effect of interventions on rising creativity levels 
of children. By comparing our results with the normative values for this test in the Portuguese 
population (see Table 1), we can see that the values for all of our study conditions are somewhat 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
136 
aligned with the normative ones, with some values exceeding the normative mean, while others 
are inferior.  
Results also showed that children in the control condition already had higher scores of 
creativity at the baseline level. After controlling for this unbalance by analyzing change scores, 
the results indicated that the increase in creativity was significantly higher in the code condition 
compared to the design condition. By looking at Figure 18 we can also see that the increase in 
the code condition is driven by an increase in TCT-DP items related to unconventional ways of 
thinking (namely the items NE, CTH, and UCs). This means that being involved in STEM 
activities that involve coding robots increases children’s creativity levels related with 
unconventional thinking (or divergent thinking) which is important, since learning how to code 
have been massively incorporated in schools as part of their curriculum with the main aim of 
teaching children new ways to interact with technology. Our results thus suggest that such 
activities potentiate creativity levels in children, which can be considered a positive side effect of 
STEM. 
When considering the two creativity dimensions of TCT-DP, adaptiveness and 
innovativeness, results showed that both adaptiveness and innovativeness increased from pre- to 
post-test, demonstrating that these two dimensions of creativity were stimulated in all groups. 
Given the multiple levels of analysis for this test, we have simplified these results in Table 2. 
When considering the interaction effect of the groups and phase on innovativeness, results 
showed a significant increase in control and coding conditions. However, the effect size for the 
coding condition appeared as higher than the effect size of the control condition. This seems to 
show a high magnitude effect of coding robots has on children’s creativity. Moreover, since the 
control condition had higher creativity scores for both dimensions at baseline, we again 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
137 
performed analysis considering the variance of scores. Results showed a higher variance of 
scores in the coding condition compared to the design condition for the innovativeness 
dimension. No significant difference was found for adaptiveness. Therefore, the main gain in 
global creativity scores seems to be led by a gain in the innovativeness dimension. We recall that 
innovativeness is related to breaking limits, having humor, and the ability to think in perspective, 
contrasting with adaptiveness that is related to conventional thinking and manipulations 
(Nogueira, Almeida, & Lima, 2017). 
It is thus interesting to see that coding robots stimulates innovativeness in children, more 
than designing robots. We associate this result to the nature of the coding task, in which children 
had to experiment by trial and error multiple ways of completing the coding activities, which in 
turn, stimulated aspects of non-conventional thinking. Despite the coding condition having 
higher creativity scores than control, this difference was not deemed significant. This seems to 
show that despite no difference was found, creativity levels were still high. Therefore, being 
involved in art-related activities (control condition) continues to be an effective way to potentiate 
creativity in children. This result was foreseen for the control condition, making it a fair 
benchmarking comparison to the experimental conditions. 
Limitations 
This study had several limitations that we would like to acknowledge. The first limitation 
concerns the experimental design of the study, which consisted of a quasi-experimental design 
study, as each condition was conducted in a different school. The reasoning behind this choice 
concerned the guidelines for ethics towards children when different interventions are involved in 
a study (e.g., to avoid participants that are included in the control condition to feel disappointed 
if they learn that their colleagues were involved in an experimental condition that is perceived as 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
138 
more interesting) (Lohan et al., 2017). The involved schools were private schools from the 
region of Lisbon and were comparable in terms of size (i.e., the number of classes per school 
year and the number of children in each class was similar) and tuition (i.e., similarly priced 
schools). Although we have tried to control for the school variables as well as children’s 
variables, namely age, gender, and grades, there are still inherent differences between schools, 
such as the school culture, that could be influencing the results.  
Another limitation of this study consisted of the nature of the activities between the 
experimental and control conditions. Children were organized in small groups in both 
experimental conditions, however, the control condition was performed in the context of a music 
class (thus, including the classroom as a whole and not dividing into smaller groups). As group 
effects are extensively documented in the literature (e.g., Karau, & Hart, 1998), large differences 
in group size as the one present in our study, could be influencing the results. Therefore, despite 
all the conditions were performed with groups of children, the groups were of different sizes and 
the interpretation of results should take this limitation into account. 
Highlights 
• STEM-like activities, such as coding and designing robots, impacts the creative potential 
of children. 
• Activities with robots’ impact children’s innovativeness thought responsible for or non-
conventional ways of thinking. 
• This study shows the potential to use robots to nurture creativity. 
Implications for this Thesis 
This was our initial study to assess the potential to use robots as tools to be included in a 
creativity intervention. EE relied on pre-existing activities with robots, namely STEM activities 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
139 
in which children program and design a robot, to understand how their creativity levels vary. Our 
results showed the creativity levels of children increase and that the innovativeness way of 
thinking, which is related to non-conventional thinking patterns, was the most stimulated during 
the robot activities. This result per se gave us a solid indication that integrating robots in 
creativity practices could provide effects om children’s creativity. With this result in mind, we 
decided to then build our robotic character. Details about the design, fabrication, and 
development of the robot are present in the next Chapter of this thesis. 
 
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
140 
Chapter 5. Designing, building, and programing YOLO, a robot for creativity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This chapter is based on the following papers: 
Alves-Oliveira, P., Arriaga, P., Paiva, A., & Hoffman, G. (2019). Guide to build YOLO, a 
creativity-stimulating robot for children. HardwareX, 6, e00074. 
doi:10.1016/j.ohx.2019.e00074 
Alves-Oliveira, P., Gomes, S., Chandak, A., Arriaga, P., Hoffman, G., & Paiva, A. (2020). 
Software architecture for YOLO, a creativity-stimulating robot. SoftwareX (accepted) 
Alves-Oliveira, P., Arriaga, P., Paiva, A., & Hoffman, G. (Under review). Children as Robot 
Designers (submitted to CoDesign Journal). 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
141 
Abstract 
Intending to stimulate creativity in children using a robot, we have designed, programmed, and 
fabricated YOLO. YOLO is a non-anthropomorphic social robot for children specifically 
developed for storytelling activities, in which the robot acts as a character. To stimulate 
creativity, YOLO makes use of creativity techniques that promote the creation of new storylines 
that would not emerge otherwise. Therefore, it is during the interaction between children and the 
robot that creativity can be stimulated. Particularly, YOLO can stimulate divergent and 
convergent thinking for story creations. In addition to YOLO’s creativity techniques, this robot 
shows different personalities, providing it with a rich landscape of behaviors for immersive play 
and character-building. The design of the appearance and behaviors of YOLO was informed by: 
(1) psychological theories and models on creativity and personality, (2) design research 
including user-centered design practices with children, (3) interviews with creativity experts that 
work with children in improvisation. The end product was a robot that interacts with children 
using minimalistic social signals to communicate intentions during story creations. The non-
verbal expressive modalities of YOLO consist in the expression of lights and movements. The 
timing in which these behaviors are expressed have the potential of increasing divergent or 
convergent thinking during story creations. In this Chapter, we detail on the software and 
hardware of YOLO. 
Keywords: Robot, design, hardware, software
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
142 
Introduction 
Children are avid explorers, using objects to play and learn about the world (Piaget, 2013; 
Smith, 2017; Vygotsky, 1967). Toys play are essential objects in children’s lives since they are 
always present during their favorite plays, being this especially true for pretend play (e.g., 
storytelling) (Sutton-Smith, 1986). The usage of toys during play have shown to be related to 
healthy cognitive, emotional, and physical development (Healey & Mendelsohn, 2019; Singer, 
2009). A child who does not explore and play is often identified by parents and childhood 
professionals as a child at risk (Cecil, Gray, Thornburg, & ISPA, 1985). As play involves the 
transformation of people, actions, and scenes, into objects (or toys), creativity arises within 
interaction and representation of toys as characters in play; demonstrating how the concepts of 
play, toys, and creativity is intricately intertwined (Schwartzman, 2012).Indeed, it is in the 
alignment of toys and play that creative narratives emerge (Sutton‐Smith, 1992). As toys are 
used as artifacts for children’s imagination, they serve as stimuli whose intent is to trigger 
creativity and other cognitive skills important to be stimulated at this young age (Berlyne, 1960; 
Piaget, 2013). 
Different types of play behavior are reported in the literature (Rubin & Howe, 1985; 
Whitebread et al., 2017). These are physical play (the earliest type of play that includes rhythmic 
stereotypies, exercise play, and is often called “rough-and-tumble” play) (Bjorklund & Brown, 
1998; Brussoni et al., 2015; Pellegrini & Bohn, 2005; Pellegrini, & Smith, 1998; Pellis & Pellis, 
2013), play with objects (or sensorimotor play; starts when children learn how to grasp objects 
and include mouthing/biting and later on making and constructing behaviors emerge) (Stroud, 
1995), symbolic play (or semiotic play; usage of various symbolic representational systems we 
use to make and communicate meaning, such as making sounds and drawing) (Christie, & 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
143 
Roskos, 2006), pretend play (include activities characterized by “as-if” moments, or a “pretense” 
is layered over reality during play) (Lillard et al., 2013), and games with rules (describes more 
organized forms of play in which there is some clear and publicly expressed goal) (DeVries, 
2006; Boyle et al., 2016; Hassinger-Das et al., 2017). From these types of play, pretend play is 
the one most associated with creativity expansion (Mottweiler, & Taylor, 2014; Wallace & Russ, 
2015; Hoffmann & Russ, 2016). In this work, we will use storytelling with children as the main 
activity for creativity stimulation, therefore, contributing to research on pretend play styles.  
A new generation of technological objects is joining the more traditional set of toys, 
including smart-phones, tablets, virtual and augmented reality devices. Research shows that 
children are using smartphones, tablets, and computers as their toys as they are immersive and 
playful elements that engage children (Lee, 2012). Additionally, virtual reality is another 
effective playful media for children, offering a 3D interactive environment to play, learn, and 
potentially develop skills (Harris, & Reid, 2005). Virtual reality has been extensively used to 
explore new contexts of play as children literally feel placed in the scene and become actively 
engaged with the surrounding environment. In line with this, augmented reality has been used as 
a medium for promoting pretend play (Bai, Blackwell, & Coulouris, 2012), enrich gaming 
experiences (Tan & Soh, 2010), and as a new asset for contexts of learning (Akçayır & Akçayır, 
2017; Bacca, Baldiris, Fabregat, Graf, & Kinshuk, 2014; Ibáñez & Delgado-Kloos, 2018; Phon, 
Ali, & Halim, 2014; Radu, 2014). Taken together, the opportunities offered by digital devices to 
children allow for moments of fun and relaxation, to share materials with friends, and are a 
pleasurable way to pass the time when children are by themselves (Livingstone, Marsh, 
Plowman, Ottovordemgentschenfelde, & Fletcher-Watson, 2014).  
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
144 
Despite the positive experiences associated with these technologies, research reports that 
children are engaging in excessive screen-time (Bucksch et al., 2016), which means they are 
spending too much time in sedentary activities, such as being seated in front of the tv, tablet, 
computer, or smartphones (Inchley et al., 2016). However, physical activity is one of the most 
important activities at all ages, especially during childhood, providing benefits in health (Janssen 
& LeBlanc, 2010; Mnich, Weyland, Jekauc, & Schipperijn, 2019) and learning (Sneck et al., 
2019). Although some digital games have been designed to afford some degree of physical 
activity, such as movements of the upper/lower body (Biddiss, & Irwin, 2010), children are still 
restricted to a small and limited space and perform activities that are somewhat unnatural (e.g., 
raise your arms to fetch an apple in the tree, although neither the apple nor the tree exists in 
reality. Robots enter as a new type of technological artifact that co-exists in our physical space 
and is guided by the same laws of physics and time. These shared experiences make robots a 
special type of technology that can be used in physical activity promotion. While some robots 
have been developed as physical exercises coaches these target older populations and not 
children (Lotfi, Langensiepen, & Yahaya, 2018); robots for children are usually stationary as 
they are power-outlet dependent, or due to their sensitive hardware which does not allow for 
unrestrained manipulations that happen during playtimes. The potential of using robots as tools 
for unrestrained play appears to be scarce or non-existent. In this Chapter, we will present the 
design, fabrication, and programming of a robot meant to be used by children during unrestricted 
storytelling spaces.  
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
145 
 
Figure 20. Roadmap of the work performed to develop YOLO included designing, building, and 
programming (coding) the robot. This was a two-year long iterative process that included a total 
of 134 children at all stages. 
 
Our contribution 
This Chapter presents the development of a social robot that can benefit children’s 
creativity during playtime. It is divided into three main sections, which correspond with the tree 
main stages of the robot development. These are the design, building, and programming of 
YOLO robot (see Figure 20). Children were included at all stages of the development of YOLO, 
from co-design partners, to testers and users of the robot. This consisted of a two-year-long field 
design research, involving 134 children, and adopting a multidisciplinary approach in which a 
team of psychologists, computer scientists, mechanical and electrical engineers, designed a robot 
together. During this time, the robot was refined on its hardware and software according to the 
results from studies with children, but also taking into account theoretical models from 
psychology and design research. In particular, we relied on models of creativity and personality 
to develop YOLO. A third input for the robot’s design came from experts and practitioners of 
creativity activities with children, who detain functional knowledge about strategies of 
interaction with children that can foster their creativity levels.  
The challenge here was to accommodate the different knowledge sources into the design 
of a robot. To do so, we have developed novel methodologies of participatory design that would 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
146 
accommodate children. This meant that interviews or open questions in written formats were 
taken aside as they were not well suited for 7-year-old children as a form of data collection. We, 
therefore, created new forms of participatory design practices, based on playful interaction 
modes, to bring children at the heart of design and robot testing. The end result of this effort was 
a creativity-provoking robot called YOLO that is both robust and playful for children to play 
with. We now detail on the design, building, and programming of this robot. 
Designing YOLO 
In this section, we detail the process of designing a social robot for and with children. 
During the design process, children were placed at the heart of all the design stages as 
informants, users, experts, and design partners (Druin, 2002). We have adopted User-Centered 
Design (UCD) practices as these give voice to human needs, capabilities and behaviors, and can 
lead to increasingly usable and valuable products (Norman, 2013). Designers of social robots are 
often hard-pressed to include users in meaningful ways in the design process yet bring them in 
only during later stages of evaluation, when most of the design choices have been implemented 
(Tsvyatkova & Storni, 2019). At this moment, a few aspects of the robot design can be changed 
as major design decisions have already been taken without the users’ input. The reasons behind 
including users so late in the design process related with the following: (1) working through a 
long iterative process within a multidisciplinary team presents challenges, e.g., each field has 
their own technical language which can make understanding between different teams hard to 
accomplish; (2) the novelty of the robot device can provoke modes of interaction that will change 
over time. This means that the novelty effect that users feel when testing a type of technology 
they are interacting with for the first time on their lives (such as social robots) does not provide a 
fair representation of a long-term interaction, which leaves designers with biased data; (3) there 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
147 
is a hard-to-strike balance between engineering development and user experience research, as 
methods for eliciting informative feedback from users over robot prototypes are scarce. This is 
especially true for certain populations, such as children. This means that, e.g., asking users what 
they want it not always the most informative feedback for technology improvement; (4) it can be 
challenging to have representative users and frequently the technology is tested with users that 
do not map the end-users for which the technology was developed for, e.g., adults test 
technologies that are meant to be used by children (Damodaran, 1996; Gulliksen, Lantz, & 
Boivie, 1999; Grudin, 2017; Schuler & Namioka, 1993). With children, there are additional 
challenges in finding user-centered methods that account for their developmental stages and that 
can empower their expressive and communicative abilities within the design process. This 
reveals a need to develop new methods and tools for involving children in the design process, 
especially when designing social robots that are meant for them. The major contributions of this 
work are the description of the design process of a robot for creativity stimulation according to 
specific design principles that were used according to the Double-Diamond Design process 
Model (Council, 2013). Taking into account our design experience with children we have 
derived design guidelines for designers that aim to include children in the design of social robots.  
The resulting product was a small, lightweight, and non-anthropomorphic robot. It 
affords free play due to its internal power system not constraining interactions to be stationary as 
the robot is not power-outlet dependent. An optical sensor placed at the robot’s base tracks play 
movements, and a capacitive sensor around the robot’s body determines if children are touching 
it. According to the movement generated by children during the story, the robot can provide new 
storylines using movement and lights (see Figure 1).  
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
148 
Background 
Robots for children. Research on social robotics for children can be divided into three 
major design categories: off-the-shelf robots, robotic design kits, and robots that emerged from 
design research. Off-the-shelf robots are used as pre-designed research platforms (often designed 
for adults) that can be programmed for a particular research goal. Examples of research that used 
commercial robots for children, included the NAO (Serholt, 2018) and Pepper robots (Tanaka et 
al., 2015), Jibo (Kory-Westlund & Breazeal, 2019), Cozmo (Druga, Williams, Park, & Breazeal, 
2018), Zeno (Cameron et al., 2015), KASPAR (Wood, Zaraki, Robins, & Dautenhahn, 2019). 
Keepon (Shen, Slovak, & Jung, 2018), etc. 
Robotic design kits are used as tools to foster learning in different knowledge domains. 
This category falls into Digital Manipulatives (Papert, 1980), defined as computationally 
enhanced versions of traditional toys for children, used as new tools for learning and growing 
(Resnick, 1998; Resnick et al., 1998). Examples are LEGO® Mindstorms, a commercially 
available design kit that derived from research. It includes concepts from Programmable Bricks 
(Resnick, Martin, Sargent, & Silverman, 1996) Magix (Ackermann, Strohecker, & Agarwala, 
1997; Ackermann & Strohecker, 1999), Block Jam  (Newton-Dunn, Nakano, & Gibson, 2003), 
Topobo (Raffle, Parkes, & Ishii, 2004), Smart Tiles (Elumeze & Eisenberg, 2005), Digital MiMs 
(Zuckerman, Arida, & Resnick, 2005,), Boda Blocks (Buechley & Eisenberg, 2007), Thymio 
(Vitanza, Rossetti, Mondada, & Trianni, 2019), and others (Schweikardt & Gross, 2007). The 
overarching idea is that through the process of building these kits, they become instruments for 
children to think and understand the world. 
Robots derived from design research include children in some edges of the design 
process. For example, with Shybo robot, children (and their parents) were involved from early 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
149 
stages in the design process, informing the application scenario for this robot through the use of 
surveys. In addition to this, children were also testers of the final prototype participating in field 
studies in school to investigate if the robot met the initially established design requirements. 
While storyboard sketching, low-functioning, and low-fidelity prototypes of Shybo were 
developed, children were not included in these design stages (Lupetti, 2017; Lupetti, Yao, Mi, & 
Germak, 2017). Another example is the involvement of children in the design process of Ranger 
(Fink et al., 2014) and Cellulo (Özgür et al., 2017; Özgür, 2018). In these cases, researchers used 
the Wizard-of-Oz (WoZ) technique to inform interaction between children and robots. WoZ is a 
technique often used in HRI in which a human is hidden and controlling the robot, while the 
robot us interacting with users without their awareness that a human is “behind the curtain” 
(Riek, 2012). With the design of Curlybot, children were invited as testers of the final technology 
to study learning-oriented acquisitions (Frei, Su, Mikhak, & Ishii, 2000). Overall, despite 
children being included in some stages of the design process, robots designed to be used by 
children are still very much in the hands of researchers. As mentioned earlier, one of the reasons 
behind this relates to the gap of acceptable design research methods between different fields of 
research that is required to co-exist for a positive design outcome (Luria, Zimmerman, & 
Forlizzi, 2019). In the case of our robot, it was developed using design research as many of the 
implemented methodologies come from UCD. 
Additionally, robots vary in their appearance and behaviors, depending on the application 
scenario for which they were developed. While Erica robot was designed to have human-like 
features such as eyelashes and lips (Glas, Minato, Ishi, Kawahara, & Ishiguro, 2016), other 
robots can have cartoon-like features with exaggerated eyes and expressions, such as Kismet 
(Breazeal, 2003), or have abstract shapes such as Kip (Anderson-Bashan et al., 2018; Zuckerman 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
150 
et al., 2016) Their behaviors can incorporate natural language speech (Kahn Jr et al., 2012), 
emotional expression (Paiva, Leite, Boukricha, & Wachsmuth, 2017), and artificial 
communication modalities using lights (Baraka & Veloso, 2018), motion (Knight & Simmons, 
2016) sound (Moore, Tennent, Martelaro, & Ju, 2017; Tennent, Moore, Jung, & Ju, 2017), multi-
modal displays (Löffler, Schmidt, & Tscharn, 2018), among other additional non-verbal 
behaviors (for a survey see Cha, Kim, Fong, & Mataric, 2018). Social robots for children have 
been used within a variety of application scenarios, from learning (Belpaeme, Kennedy, 
Ramachandran, Scassellati, & Tanaka, 2018; Benitti, 2012; Mubin, Stevens, Shahid, Al 
Mahmud, & Dong, 2013; Spolaôr & Benitti, 2017; Toh, Causo, Tzuo, Chen, & Yeo, 2016), 
assistance and rehabilitation (Boucenna et al., 2014; Diehl, Schmitt, Villano, & Crowell, 2012; 
Pennisi et al., 2016; Rabbitt, Kazdin, & Scassellati, 2015; Scassellati, Admoni, & Matarić, 2012; 
Tejima, 2001), and play (Leite et al., 2010; Lupetti, Yao, Mi, & Germak, 2017; Robins et al., 
2010; Robins et al., 2012; Short et al., 2014; Zaga, Moreno, & Evers, 2017). They have been 
used in different contexts, such as at home (Scassellati et al., 2018), in school (Alves-Oliveira, 
Sequeira, Melo, Castellano, & Paiva, 2019; Kanda, Hirano, Eaton, & Ishiguro, 2004) and within 
organized activities in the format of outreach (Ruiz-del-Solar, 2009) and workshops (Magnenat, 
Riedo, Bonani, & Mondada, 2012) for children. The interaction can occur individually or within 
groups (Correia et al., 2019), and can range from a short-term to interactions that last extended 
periods of time (Leite, Martinho, & Paiva, 2013; Westlund, Park, Williams, & Breazeal, 2018). 
In the case of our robot, it was designed with an abstract shape and uses corresponding minimal 
behaviors with lights and movements to interact with children.  
Design process of social robots. The design process of social robots oftentimes is an 
iterative process that takes into account the robot’s context of use, application scenarios, physical 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
151 
embodiment, and interactive behavior (Mast et al., 2012; Šabanović, Reeder, & Kechavarzi, 
2014). These variables deeply influence and inform the design process and are described below. 
1. Context of use - Designers usually evaluate the which needs are not met by observing 
interactions or daily routines taking place in real-world contexts. This technique is known 
as need-finding (Patnaik & Becker, 1999). To assess the users’ needs, techniques such as 
direct observation, in-situ interviews, and focus groups, are used to explore the design 
space for a robot (Martelaro & Ju, 2019; Mutlu & Forlizzi, 2008; Pantofaru & Takayama, 
2011). The findings from this stage enable meaningful and effective robot design by 
highlighting the needs of users in real-world contexts. 
2. Application Scenario -Given the knowledge gathered about the users’ needs, specific 
scenarios are proposed and developed. Robot designers perform brainstorming sessions 
to generate creative solutions that meet users’ needs (Byrne & Barlow, 1993). Story-
boarding and sketching help to narrow down solutions, providing a way to visualize and 
understand the interactive behavior between a user and a robot (Azenkot, Feng, & 
Cakmak, 2016; Kuo, Jayawardena, Broadbent, & MacDonald, 2011; Lupetti, 2017; 
Truong, Hayes, & Abowd, 2006). 
3. Physical Embodiment - Different techniques have also been used to explore the two 
most important features of a social robot's identity: embodiment and movement. 
Sketching is one of the techniques used (Diana & Thomaz, 2011; Gomez, Szapiro, 
Galindo, & Nakamura, 2018; Hoffman, Zuckerman, Hirschberger, Luria, & Shani 
Sherman, 2015; Luria, Hoffman, Megidish, Zuckerman, & Park, 2016; Obaid, 
Barendregt, Alves-Oliveira, Paiva, & Fjeld, 2015), along with 3D animation studies 
(Hoffman & Ju, 2014; Ribeiro & Paiva, 2012) and rapid prototyping techniques (Lee et 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
152 
al., 2009), to explore shape and movement design. At the end of this stage, robot 
designers have a clear idea about the embodiment of the robot and possible interaction 
scenarios. 
4. Interactive Behaviors - To guide the algorithm design for the artificial intelligence of a 
social robot the WoZ technique is often used to simulate social interactive behaviors 
between a human and a robot and discover which behaviors are beneficial and thus worth 
exploring (Hoffman, 2016; Martelaro, 2016; Martelaro, & Ju, 2017; Sequeira et al., 2016; 
Wang, Sibi, Mok, & Ju, 2017). These are joined by different techniques, such as 
embodied improvisation, storyboarding, puppeteering, video prototyping (Hoffman et al., 
2015; Hoffman, & Shamir, 2015; Sirkin & Ju, 2015; Slyper, Sirkin et al., 2016; 
Spadafora, Chahuneau, Martelaro, Sirkin, & Ju, 2016; Tennent, Moore, & Ju, 2018), and 
develop interaction patterns (Sirkin, Mok, Yang, & Ju, 2015). 
5. Evaluation – The last stage of a robot design process finishes with a final evaluation and 
final testing of the robot, sometimes including end-users of the technology. The testing of 
robots designed for children has been performed at university labs (Kahn Jr et al., 2012) 
and in real-world contexts (Kanda, Hirano, Eaton, & Ishiguro, 2004), with this latter 
increasing the external validity of the evaluation results (Baxter, Kennedy, Senft, 
Lemaignan, & Belpaeme, 2016). 
As mentioned before, despite this wide range of design approaches for social robots, users 
are not systematically included in all design stages. In the majority of the cases, users collaborate 
only during the evaluation stage, rarely prevailing for the entire process of design process 
(Jensen & Skov, 2005). Including users in the design process aligns with critical design 
principles intended to engage them into thinking, exploring ideas, and challenging assumptions, 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
153 
leading to user empowerment (Bardzell, Bardzell, Forlizzi, Zimmerman, & Antanitis, 2012; 
Bardzell, & Bardzell, 2013). However, critical design research is scarce when considering 
designing social robots. The novelty of this work lies in the dedication of the design process to 
children by considering their ideas and views at all design stages. Additionally, most of the 
methods for designing robots primarily rely on character-building-professionals, such as actors 
(Knight, 2011) and dancers (Ros & Demiris, 2013), or include adult populations during the 
design process. This leaves children with fewer opportunities to participate in the design process 
of a robot that is actually meant to be for them (Fails, Guha, & Druin, 2013). Our work lies on 
UCD practices for a full design process of a social robot, by systematically and directly 
involving children in all design stages through participatory design methods. This methodology 
gives children voice during the design, which is aligning with critical design (Bardzell, & 
Bardzell, 2013). 
Participatory design and children. Participatory design (PD) is a method from user-
centered design (UCD) research that empowers users during a design process (Schuler & 
Namioka, 1993; Simonsen & Robertson, 2012; Veale, 2005), leading to meaningful, 
approachable, and joyful products or experiences (Norman, 2013). Most PD methods applied 
with children grew out of or built on ideas from PD practices for adults (Fails, Guha, & Druin, 
2013). However, children have different cognitive, motor, emotional, and communication 
abilities (Gruber & Vonèche, 1977; Thompson & Goodvin, 2005), requiring adaptation of PD 
methods. Traditional media used in PD, such as interviews and questionnaires, are usually not 
the best approach with children (Druin, Stewart, Proft, Bederson, & Hollan, 1997), even when 
these assessment metrics were deliberately developed for this young age group (Fuchs, 2008). 
Drawbacks associated with these metrics relate with characteristics of children (e.g., cognitive 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
154 
abilities vary considerably across age-related children), characteristics of the questionnaire (e.g., 
complexity and length of the question, and the number of response categories), and interview 
characteristics (e.g., richness of children’s vocabulary to properly articulate responses) (Borgers 
& Hox, 2000; Fuchs, 2008). Other methods, such as brainstorming, can be used both with adults 
and children, but the cognitive level of a child may mean that abstract concepts need to be 
explained in a concrete manner. This is why brainstorming sessions with children benefit from 
tangible objects for ideation. In the literature, children have been included in PD practices for 
interactive technologies design under a few different roles, such as user, tester, informant, and 
design partner (Druin, 2012) and more recently as co-researchers (Van Doorn, 2016), and 
protagonists (Iversen, Smith, and Dindler, 2017). For the development of our robot, we involved 
children in the majority of these roles, such as informant, user, tester, and design partner.  
Design principles 
Based on prior work in the constructivism school of thought, in creativity and design 
research, we identified a set of principles that guided the design of YOLO robot. 
• Design principle 1: Low floor, wide walls. Technology is considered to have “low floor 
and wide walls” when it is easy for novices to get started without requiring an entirely 
new skill set to perform the task (low floor), and when it supports the exploration of a 
wide variety of projects (wide walls) (Resnick & Silverman, 2005). This can be achieved 
by designing few and specific behaviors for the robot that promote quick understanding 
and engagement; this encourages positive first interactions with the robot that lead to 
further explorations. 
• Design principle 2: Creativity provocations. Prior work has shown that divergent 
thinking, together with convergent thinking, are essential forms of the creative thought, 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
155 
and that more studies on convergent thinking should be encouraged since convergence 
can lead to tangible solutions (Cropley, 2006). Using robots to provoke higher levels of 
creativity requires implementing validated techniques or programs from the psychology 
literature whose effectiveness has been proven (e.g., Smith, 1998). 
• Design principle 3: Open-ended playfulness. According to Piaget, “play is the work of 
children” (Piaget, 1971), as this constitutes their central daily activity used to learn, 
explore, and connect with the world around them and with others. Open-ended play are 
environments specifically supportive of creativity as they trigger fantasy, imagination, 
and make-believe (Krafft & Berk, 1998; van Hoeve, De Valk, & Bekker, 2013).  
• Design principle 4: Abstraction as disappointment avoidance. When human 
expectations of social robot capabilities are not met, they tend to feel the robot let them 
down (Cha, Dragan, & Srinivasa, 2015; Kaplan, 2005;). Disappointment is especially 
evident when interacting with anthropomorphic robot whose physical appearance does 
not match its social capabilities, e.g., the robot has eyes but cannot “see” (Choi & Kim, 
2009). Designing for abstraction mean that the abstract physical appearance of the robot 
does not compromise its social abilities, which are instead discovered in the process of 
interacting with the robot. 
Building in these four principles, the YOLO robot was designed as follows: To create a low 
floor, we designed a robot has a limited number of features, which are simple and specific, and 
that enable children without any previous experience with it to create a story. To create wide 
walls, we designed the behaviors for the robot that are non-directional and that allow for the 
creation of varying story topics and content. To provoke creativity, we focused on two 
techniques that allow for the stimulation of divergent and convergent thinking used by the 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
156 
 
Figure 21. Design process applied to Human-Robot Interaction, based on the Double-Diamond 
Design Process Model that incorporates four main iterative stages: discover, define, develop, and 
deliver (Council, 2005; Norman, 2013). The design process used formative research, in which 
intermediate assessments with end-users in real-world context of interaction are conducted. 
Experimental controlled studies to validate the effectiveness of the robot are optional and when 
included can complement the Deliver stage. Retrieved from Alves-Oliveira, Arriaga, Paiva, and 
Hoffman (under review). 
 
robot at specific stages of the storytelling; this enables the elaboration of a given story idea 
(convergent thinking) or moving towards a plot twist (divergent thinking). Open-ended play was 
ensured for the storytelling activity as children were allowed to create a story about any theme 
they desired and had no time limits. The openness of the story theme was possible as children are 
familiar with the structure of stories, which provided them with some structure to for creativity 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
157 
and imagination. To avoid disappointment when interacting with the robot, it was designed with 
physical affordances that would map its actual capabilities.  
Additionally, to design our robot, we evoked several participatory design practices that 
involve children as active contributors from early design stages to the final consumption of the 
robot as users. The use of a child-centered approach rests on several identified design principles 
that made the design process successful: object choice, playfulness, child spaces, and child 
policies. We used objects appropriated to children, such as toys and craft materials, to create our 
design tools. Playfulness was at the core of all activities to stimulate children’s expression and 
communication. Familiar spaces, such as school playgrounds and schoolyards, were the stage 
where the design process unfolded. Child policies related to ethical, legal, and administrative 
aspects, were considered from the beginning as influential factors for method and tools choice 
during studies. Our child-centered design practices proved to be efficient in improving the design 
of a robot given children’s feedback, having also been an empowering process for children as the 
design decisions reflect their needs and desires. 
Design Process of YOLO, a Robot for Creativity Enhancement in Children 
Our design approach for the YOLO robot is based on the Double-Diamond Design 
Process Model (Council, 2005; Norman, 2013) which maps the UCD onto four stages: Discover, 
Define, Develop, and Deliver. Table 12 shows how children’s design roles map onto the 
established Double-Diamond Design Process Model, and how it relates to the various research 
activities that children undertook. Figure 21 presents the same model but generalized for the field 
of HRI. We now detail on each of these four design stages.  
Discovery with Experts, Theory, and Observation.  The first stage of the Double-
Diamond Design Process was “Discover”, where basic insights about the problem are collected. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
158 
In our work, the goal of this stage was to investigate how creativity unfolds and what practices 
can be applied to stimulate it. We used a three-fold approach, which included interviews with 
creativity education experts, an extensive literature review of theories of creativity, and direct 
observation of children during playtime, described below. 
• Expert Interviews and Observations - We conducted semi-structured interviews and 
direct observation of two creativity education experts that teach dance and theatre 
improvisation classes to children. Our goal was to understand the methods they use to 
stimulate creativity during these activities. We discovered that creativity occurs through 
structured but open-ended activities framed with playfulness (Zaporah, 1995). A common 
aspect of every creative activity was the emergence of stories to facilitate the creative 
process of children. The design decision for this stage was the choice of a creative 
storytelling as the activity to include a robot in children's playtime; 
• 
Literature Review - We conducted a systematic review of validated 
techniques for creativity training with children (see Chapter 2). The design decision for 
this stage concerned the adoption of two techniques for creativity stimulation to be 
implemented as part of the behavior of the robot. The techniques chosen were the 
Contrasting and Mirroring techniques (Smith, 1998). Both of these techniques relate to 
idea generation, a core aspect of story creation.  While the Contrast technique stimulates 
divergent thinking, the Mirror technique is responsible for the development of convergent 
thinking. Both are required to establish the emergence of creativity (Lubart, 2001), rather 
than the more basic act of unregulated self-expression (Cropley, 2006). 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
159 
Table 12. Design Process of the robot according to the Double-Diamond Model of Design (Council, 2005), describing the roles of 
children (Druin, 2002), study goal and type, methods and tools used (Fails, Guha, & Druin, 2013), and major outcomes of the user-
centered design with children. Retrieved from Alves-Oliveira, Arriaga, Paiva, and Hoffman (under review). 
 
Stage I: Discover 
Stage II: Define 
Stage III: Develop 
Stage IV: Deliver 
Role of 
children 
Informants 
Design partners 
Testers 
Users 
Study goal 
Investigate the emergence of 
creativity and how it can be 
stimulated. 
Involve children in the design of 
the social behaviors during 
storytelling. 
Improve and refine the robot’s AI 
and physical shape. 
Final evaluation of a creativity 
stimulation robot for playtimes. 
Study type 
- Expert interviews and 
observation; 
- Literature review; 
- Observation. 
- Co-design with children 
- Refinement of the robot 
Software; 
- Refinement of the robot 
physical embodiment. 
- Validation of social behaviors 
for storytelling; 
- Validation of creativity 
techniques for story creations. 
Methods 
and 
techniques 
- Interviews; 
- Systematic review; 
- Behavioral observation. 
- Sketching; 
- Puppeteering; 
- Body-storming. 
- Co-discovery; 
- Direct observation; 
- Active involvement. 
- Cards; 
- Drawing; 
- Behavior observation. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
160 
 
Outcome 
- Storytelling as the activity for 
creativity stimulation; 
- Contrast and Mirror as 
the creativity training 
techniques for the robot; 
- Personality as the basis for the 
robot’s social behaviour to 
increase story narratives. 
- Identification of behaviour 
patterns designed by children as 
input for the design of the robot’s 
behaviour. 
- Selection and refinement of 
behaviors for the robot to improve 
the software; 
- Adaptation of the robot’s 
physical shape to children’s play 
manipulations. 
- Preliminary results show 
the positive effect of the 
robot in stimulating creativity 
during play; 
- Drawing; 
- Behavior observation. 
Design 
decisions 
An affordance for grabbing in 
the form of an asymmetric 
concavity was added to the 
initial cube shape of robot. 
Children used personality 
characteristics to animate 
their characters, thus personality 
was used as the basis for the 
interactive behavior of the robot. 
The robot’s size was 
ergonomically molded to 
children’s hand size; a selection 
of efficient interactive behaviors 
for the robot was made based on 
children’s play. 
Preliminary results suggest the 
robot was used by children as a 
character for their stories, and 
that this may increase 
their creativity levels. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
161 
 
 
Figure 1. Iterative prototypes of the robot designed developed during the design process. Left to 
right: (1) early hand-ketches capturing movement analysis; (2) paper prototype to explore the 
size and mechanisms; (3) first actuated prototype; (4) second actuated prototype; (5) three 
different passive robot stand-ins for size and grasp studies; (6) final version of the robot. 
Retrieved from Alves-Oliveira, Arriaga, Paiva, and Hoffman (under review). 
 
• Direct observation of children during playtime - We conducted a field study in a 
school setting using direct observation with video recordings for post-observation, to 
understand how small groups of children create ideas together in a storytelling context. 
13 children (4 female, 7-10 years old) organized in 4 groups (three groups of 3 children 
and one group of 4) participated in this study. Hand-made toys with the geometric shape 
of a cube were chosen as story characters due to their abstractness and to ensure 
uniformity in the children’s experience (see Figure 22). We observed each group for 
about 30 minutes, with a total observation time in school of 2 hours. This study provided 
two outcomes. The first outcome concerned the unstructured nature of storytelling play, 
for which children oscillated between highly creative moments of divergent thinking 
showing thunderstorms of ideas, to creative moments of convergent thinking, translated 
by meaning making where ideas for their story were selected and narrowed down. This 
led to the design decision of having an open-ended story as the playful activity for  
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
162 
 
Figure 2. On the left: children using cube-toys as stand-ins for group storytelling creation during 
a free play activity. This study was part of the observation of children’s playful behavior in 
which groups of children used the cube-toys as their characters during stories. On the right: 
body-storming session in which children expressed different personalities traits using only their 
bodies and refraining from using words. This primed them to use motion to illustrate their ideas, 
e.g., they enacted personality traits, such as “grumpy”, as can be seen in the figure. Retrieved 
from Alves-Oliveira, Arriaga, Paiva, and Hoffman (under review). 
 
children and the robot. The second outcome related with the usage of personality 
attributes as the basis to design the social behavior for the robot. When creating new 
narratives for their story, children continued using personality traits to animate their 
cube-toys. To provoke more storylines when children play with the robot, we took the 
design decision of implementing a more extrovert or introvert personality into the robot 
as an expression of its social behavior. This finding goes in line with theory about 
creativity stimulation, in which creativity and personality are known to be interconnected 
variables when facing a creative situation (Batey & Furnham, 2006; Feist, 1998). 
Definition through Body-Storming, Puppeteering, and Drawing. The second stage of the 
Double-Diamond Design Process is “Define”, which focuses on specifying details of the design 
requirements. In our work, the goal of this stage was to translate the high-level findings from the 
discovery stage into specific requirements for the development of the first robot prototype. We 
involved children as partners in the design process, adapting PD methods such as body-storming, 
puppeteering, and sketching for children as co-designers. A study was conducted in a school with 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
163 
44 children (25 female, 6-9 years old) participating in the design of the robot’s social behaviors. 
Based on the previous phrase, we focused on personality traits within story-line creation. 
Children performed the activity in groups of 3-5, with each session lasting 1 hour and the total 
time of all sessions being 13 hours. The procedure used in the study is detailed below. 
• Body-Storming - Body-storming is a form of PD to enact experiential awareness 
(Schleicher, Jones, & Kachur, 2010) and an embodied ideation method for movement-
based interaction design (Segura, Vidal, & Rostami, 2016). We used body-storming to 
prime children towards understanding personality traits through enactment, so that later 
they would imbue in the robot. We used the Big Five Model of Personality (Costa Jr & 
McCrae, 2008), adapting the terminology of personality traits for children. As such, we 
used the adjectives “social and shy” instead of “extrovert/introvert”, “imaginative and 
without ideas” instead of “openness/closedness to experience”, and “kind and grumpy” 
instead of “agreeableness/antagonism” to represent the positive and negative poles 
inherent to each personality trait. The three personality traits chosen to represent the ones 
more closely related to social relationships and thus, more relevant to implement in the 
robot. During the body-storming activity, precise instructions related to personality 
expression were given to children, e.g., children were instructed to only use body 
movements, instead of natural language, to express themselves. The goal of this rule was 
to expand children’s vocabulary for movement expression to match the robot’s 
expression modalities. Figure 22 shows children in our study engaged in the body-
storming process. 
• Drawing and Puppeteering - The next stage was to use puppeteering and drawing 
techniques to develop and elaborate on the social behavior of the robot. We built a paper  
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
164 
Figure 3. On the left: paper-cubes used during the co-design study with children fabricated with 
paper and including a built-in drawing mechanism; these cubes enabled: (1) children to have a 
visual feedback for the created motions, (2) data collection of the drawn trajectories for later 
implementation in the robot, (3) a constraint for children to represent the movements in a 2D 
plane and avoiding 3D movements that are impossible to model and replicate in a real robot. On 
the right: example of a child expressing movement of a paper-cube by puppeteering it. Retrieved 
from Alves-Oliveira, Arriaga, Paiva, and Hoffman (under review). 
 
cube that included a built-in drawing mechanism and invited children to act out how this 
cube would behave according to different personality traits (see Figure 23). This 
mechanism enabled children to represent the movements of the robot by drawing them in 
large paper sheets of paper while puppeteering it (see Figure 23). In addition to 
movement design, children were invited to attribute a color to each personality of the 
robot. We collected the resulting drawings, in addition to video and audio recordings, to 
support the analysis of the results (see Figure 23). We relied on the Laban Movement 
Analysis, a method and language for describing, visualizing, interpreting and 
documenting movement, to analyze the movements produced by children using the robot 
prototype (von Laban, 1975) and discovered that children created consistent movement 
shapes according to the different personality types. Negative poles of personality traits, 
such as grumpy, were associated with fast and spike-like movements accompanied by  
 
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
165 
Figure 4. On the left: example of a sketch produced by a child using paper-cube. On the right: 
manipulation of a robot prototype for the study of the size of the robot and children’s grasping 
behavior. The robot is covered with red play-doh to collect data about the location where 
children grab the robot. Retrieved from Alves-Oliveira, Arriaga, Paiva, and Hoffman (under 
review). 
 
cold colors (as green); and positive poles of personality, such as kind, with slower and 
curly-like movements accompanied by warm colors (as yellow).  
The major design outcome of this study was the generation of specific motion and color 
patters to be implemented in the robot derived from children’s input. Therefore, three sets of 
personality traits were created. The creativity behaviors for the robot were also defined in two 
domains: convergent-stimulating behaviors consisted of mimicking the same play patterns 
created by children during play. This would trigger the elaborations over the same storylines and 
thus provoking convergence over a given topic (we called this the Mirror technique). Divergent 
thinking behavior consisted in creating different behaviors than those that children create during 
play. This would trigger plot twists in the story, provoking divergence of the plot (we called this 
the Contrast technique). 
Development through Iterative Prototyping. The third stage of the Double-Diamond 
Design Process is “Develop”, the iterative development of prototypes. The goal of this stage was 
to develop both the AI software and the physical embodiment of the robot (hardware), including 
children as testers during the design process. We developed a prototype based on the insights 
from the previous two stages and used it as a reference for the studies described below. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
166 
• Refinement of the robot software - We conducted a study in a Science Museum for 
children located in Ithaca, NY, USA, to test the first iteration of interactive behaviors, 
using a low-fidelity mechanically actuated robot prototypes (see Figure 20-3,4) for 
children to play with. The total time of the study was 4 hours and a total of 20 children 
(7-9 years old) played with the robot freely. The robot acted autonomously, which meant 
that no human was controlling the robot’s behaviors and displayed a set of behaviors 
inspired by the co-design study, including colored lights and movements. Additionally, 
we implemented novel behaviors inspired by results from previous studies to enrich the 
experience of interaction. For example, we implemented a rack and pinion mechanism 
that retracts the robot head inside its shell, and then shows it back again. We relied on co-
discovery and active intervention methods to elicit feedback from children (Van 
Kesteren, Bekker, Vermeeren, & Lloyd, 2003). During Co-discovery, children consult 
each other to understand how the robot works. In our study, children were organized in 
small groups and were prompted to tell each other how they were playing with the robot. 
The researcher would ask questions such as “can you show to your friend what the robot 
can do?” This provided insights about the interpretation of the robot’s behaviors by 
children and their explanations. For example, a child said that “[the robot] is happy 
because it is moving in circles.” Or “[the robot] is angry because he has red lights.” 
During Active Intervention, the researcher asked questions about the storytelling task and 
also about desired behaviors that children would like to see in the robot. For example, 
after being asked what was the game he was playing with the robot, a participant replied 
that he was “playing hide-and-seek and showing the robot other things” (participant that 
carried the robot around in different exhibitions at the museum, while describing to the 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
167 
robot what he was seeing). In addition to these techniques, we used direct observation of 
children free play with the robot to gather additional design requirements. The major 
outcome of this study was the selection and refinement of behaviors for the robot. For 
example, colors and motion were a major drive in storytelling. This result led us to 
explore richer ways to use these modalities by coupling light brightness and motion speed 
for behavior combinations. We removed of some features in the robot that did not support 
interaction towards storytelling and creation, such as sounds, that children paid little 
attention compared to other features. 
• Refinement of the robot hardware - We conducted a laboratory study with non-
actuated prototypes of the robot to gather design requirements for the physical shape of 
the robot. We used direct observation to discover the best suitable size for the robot, and 
to study how children grabbed the robot to inform ergonomic modifications in the shell 
for more natural playing behaviors. A total of 3 children (1 female, 7 years old 
participated by individually playing with different prototypes of the robot in sessions of 
30 minutes. We used 3D printed robot prototypes with abstract and minimal shapes of 
three different sizes - Small, Medium, and Large (see Figure 23), to test for the best size. 
Additionally, we covered the robots’ shell with clay to get data about where children 
place their hands to hold and manipulate the robot (see Figure 23). Individually, children 
were invited to trace a path on the floor with the robot by navigating the robot between 
three different key-points placed on the playground. We relied on the same method 
principle as the one used for the co-design study, by creating a playful activity that kept 
the robot grounded on the floor (a 2D plane). This created a familiar activity for children 
that enabled observations about how they would use the robot in its final context of use.  
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
168 
Figure 5. On the left: children playing with the robot and picking cards (in the middle) to guess 
what personality trait was expressed by the robot. On the right: children playing with the robot 
and creating a story together. The activity finished with children draw in their story to collect 
data about the themes that emerged. Retrieved from Alves-Oliveira, Arriaga, Paiva, and Hoffman 
(under review). 
 
Our measure of analysis was the number of instances of grabbing behavior displayed by 
children during play. Therefore, n = 40 instances were analyzed, revealing that: (1) 
children had difficulties in grasping the large-sized robot because the shell was too large 
to be ergonomically grasped by their hands; (2) children did not treat the small-sized 
robot as a character during play, possibly because its small shell did not evoke this 
affordance; (3) children grasped the medium-sized robot comfortably. Data collection  
ceased at an early stage due to saturation, a method commonly used in qualitative studies. 
Saturation occurs when the data keeps showing the same results no matter how many 
participants are recruited (Glaser, Strauss, & Strutzel, 1968; Morse, 1995). Therefore, 
when children were giving the same behavioral responses during the study, we stopped 
data collection and progressed in the design process, representing the small sample size 
for this study. Results from this study showed three major design requirements: First, 
children have no orientation commitment when manipulating an abstract robot. We 
observed that children did not attribute a fixed “front” or “back” side to the robot; second, 
children consistently used the same area on the robot for manipulating it, suggesting an 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
169 
ideal design space for grabbing; third, children manipulated the medium-sized robot 
easily, making this the preferred size considering their hands size and playing behavior. 
These results informed mechanical decisions, e.g. choice if smaller sensors and actuators 
that fit the reduced size robot model. 
Delivery through Testing and Refinement. The fourth and final stage of the Double-
Diamond Design Process is “Deliver”, where a more developed prototype is taken through 
testing and further refinement. This stage can be considered a preliminary testing stage as 
children were involved as users of the robot. We implemented the final prototype of the robot 
and refined features of the based on insights from these evaluations. 
• Social behaviors for storytelling - We conducted a study to investigate if children 
decoded the social behaviors implemented in the robot (see Figure 24). Decoding 
different behaviors in the robot was an important stage of the design process as it enables 
children to use the robot as many different characters for their story, providing 
opportunities for new narratives. This study was performed in a school setting and 
involved 22 children (6-8 years old) that individually played with the final version of an 
autonomous robot for 30 minutes (see Figure 20-6), with a total study time of 11 hours. 
We used a guessing game, similar to the classic game “Guess Who” in which children 
had to guess what the robot was expressing by choosing cards from a set of cards that we 
designed for this purpose (see Figure 24). Children were individually presented with 
three behaviors of the robot, each lasting 3 minutes, and presented in a randomized 
sequence. This was the “exploring stage” as children were incited to play with the robot 
by exploring its different behaviors. If children questioned the researcher about what the 
robot was doing, the researcher would always reply “what do you think?” This created a 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
170 
reflective mode in children, preparing them for the next stage. After being familiar with 
the personalities, the researcher distributed cards that displayed a word and an image 
about each personality trait (see Figure 24). Children picked a card for each personality 
trait and during this time it was explained to them that there were no right or wrong 
answers to avoid engaging children in test-like atmospheres. Afterward, the researcher 
engaged in a dialogue to understand the reason behind their choice for each matching 
personality card and behavior of the robot. For example, children said “I think he is 
grumpy because he is moving too fast, like I do when someone punishes me. And the one 
with the red lights is really upset.” This led to an elaborated understanding of how 
children perceived the robot, and informed further refinements in its behavior. The major 
outcome of this study was the usage of children’s feedback to improve the behaviors of 
the robot by adjusting some parameters, such as lights and speed of movement to make 
each personality trait more obvious.  
• Creativity techniques for story creations - We conducted a preliminary field study to 
investigate if children were able to create new storylines by using the robot as a character. 
The robot acted autonomously, by using the two creativity techniques of Mirroring and 
Contrasting to stimulate new story narratives. This study lasted 4 hours and was 
performed in an outreach activity for children in which a total of 32 children were 
organized in small groups and played with the robot. While children interacted with the 
robot, we prompted them to think about possible stories for the robot. Data was collected 
by asking children to draw the story they imagined with the robot in a sheet of paper 
using crayons (see Figure 24). Additionally, direct observation was conducted by a 
researcher. This was a fast-speed storytelling preliminary study by the nature of the 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
171 
outreach activity, which lead each group of children with about 5min to play with the 
robot. The outcome of this study concerned a preliminary investigation of using the robot 
as a tool to stimulate creativity during storytelling in children. Results from direct 
observation have shown that children were able to accommodate the behavior of the 
robot in their story, underlying the capacity to integrate external stimuli into a pre-
existing story mindset. This ability relates to problem solving, an important attribute of 
creative thought (Maier, 1970). Additionally, results from the drawing analysis have 
shown different types of stories created by children, some related to the school setting 
(translating a story based on daily routines), others related with higher levels of 
originality, such as stories about other worlds and species. 
Guidelines for Child-Robot Design 
This section described a two-year-long process that adapted PD methods and techniques 
to involve children in the design process of a social robot. Throughout this process, we identified 
several design principles that support the inclusion of children in the social robotic design 
process.  
• Guideline 1. Playfulness, a central mode of communication for children, should be at 
the core of all design activities. Play, especially social play, is a key part of child 
development (Vygotsky, 1967). Play is defined as a minimally scripted, open-ended 
exploration where children are absorbed in the spontaneity of the experience (Ortlieb, 
2010). In our work, we have imbued all design activities with playful elements to 
encourage children’s expression during the design process of the robot. We relied on 
playful activities such as acting, sketching, body-storming, and traditional games, to 
ground the activities that invite children to the design. By honoring children’s activities 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
172 
and ways of expression through play, we created a design process of a robot that did not 
impose an extra load of learning a new activity while at the same time providing essential 
data to design YOLO robot. 
• Guideline 2. Toys and craft materials are used by children daily and should be used 
as tools in the design process. According to their developmental stage, children engage 
in different types of play where objects, such as toys, are an integral part (Piaget, 2013). 
Toys emerge as tools that are approachable and safe to play with, fostering the 
development of children. Froebel’s gifts (Brosterman & Togashi, 1997) and Montessori’s 
view on the “education of the senses” (Montessori, 1917) are examples of how 
manipulatives can be used to empower children’s growth and development. In our work, 
we have incorporated toys and materials that are part of a child’s world in all design 
activities during the robot design and creation. To this end, we opted for paper, crayons, 
cards, and play-doh, as the tools that children relied on for the robot design. Using these 
materials keep the design process playful and elicited natural responses from children. 
• Guideline 3. Child spaces, such as playgrounds, should be the stage on which the 
design process unfolds. “Playscapes” are environments that are natural and in which 
children find joy and safety to play (Frost, 1992). Research on playground designs have 
brought to light qualities that lead to the most playful behaviors in children (Brown & 
Burger, 1984). Effective playscapes support a range of social scales, allowing for solitary 
and social play; effective playgrounds embrace emotional requirements, such as 
emotional relief spaces, including privacy and breakaway points for quiet play (Moore, & 
Cohen, 1978). In our work, we have used interior school playgrounds as they evoke 
playfulness and put our children co-designers in the right mindset for creative 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
173 
exploration. Our work is based on design-research for which we have relied on 
theoretically inspired methods applied to a local design problem that has the potential to 
impact innovations within the design of social robots (Barab, 2006). 
• Guideline 4. Using child-appropriate protocols and materials. Consider a narrative of 
briefing and debriefing that children can understand in order to explain the goal of the 
research. One example of a briefing protocol is the CHECk Tool (Read et al., 2013 
commonly used during PD sessions with children (Van Mechelen et al., 2014). This will 
enable an ethical and informed participation of children, empowering them to decide if 
they want to enroll in the study. Consider data collection methods that are child-friendly, 
such as the Fun Toolkit that uses a Smilyometer instead of Likert scales (Read, 2008) 
before jumping into the actual activity add an ice-breaking activity with children that can 
be as simple as sharing hobbies or implementing other techniques, such as Vignettes 
(Hazel, 1995); this will result in more relaxed environment with children being more 
expressive and honest in their opinions towards the technology being tested (Gibson, 
2007). 
• Guideline 5. Designing with children requires a multidisciplinary team. Experts from 
a variety of backgrounds are a requisite when working with children. For example, when 
performing a study with children in a school, an expert in children’s dynamics (such a 
psychologist that is trained to interact with children in study contexts) is required, as well 
as an expert in robotics (such as an engineer that can intervene when a problem with the 
robot arises). Multidisciplinary teamwork enables focus on different aspects during a 
study. In teams made up of experts in different backgrounds, however, special care needs 
to be given to develop a common language to support mutual understanding during 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
174 
different design stages. Team members should be trained together in the lab before 
heading to a study with children. should meet regularly to provide updates about design 
stages and make sure that their individual tasks converge toward the intended project 
goal. 
• Guideline 6. Prepare to spend time on legal and ethical policies that concern child 
studies. In particular, note that these policies are very localized and thus differ per 
institution, e.g., school district, university, specific school policies. Safety standards 
require that the methods and materials employed in studies with children are certified or 
are adapted for the child’s developmental stage. Privacy and confidentiality require the 
adoption of alternative methods for data collection that protect a child's identity. All of 
this can cause restrictions on the study conducted and may, therefore, require exploring 
alternatives to originally conceived methods, e.g., using direct observation instead of 
video recordings. Having a long preparation time, and being open to change, is key to 
conducting design studies with children. 
• Guideline 7. Conduct pre- and post-activities with your study partners, such as 
schools and museums. Visit the place where the study will be performed beforehand to 
understand the resources you have available, as this might define the conditions for your 
study. This includes understanding the physical (e.g., spaces in the school that you can 
use to conduct the sessions, location of power outlets) and administrative conditions (e.g., 
understanding who you will be coordinating with to have children coming in an 
organized way to the sessions). Consider performing clarification sessions with teachers 
and parents before the study begins as a strategy to have the institution on board during 
your study and parents signing consent forms in an informed way. At the end of the study 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
175 
thank the school for the time, space, and coordination that enabled the study to be 
performed. This can be accomplished by performing a debriefing session about 
preliminary results at the end of the study, or by sending materials of interest to the 
school such as articles that describe your results. This is not only a way to thank your 
partners, but also assures a good connection to institutions and provide a return place in 
case additional sessions are needed. 
Discussion 
This work demonstrates the full design process of a social robot for creativity 
development. The design process of this robot relied on specific design principles applied to the 
Double-Diamond Design Process Model (Council, 2005), and brought children into each stage 
the design process. Children participated in the design of the robot under different design roles, 
such as informants, partners, testers, and users. The inclusion of children required adapting 
existing methods of UCD and PC practices to match how children experience the world and how 
they express themselves. We found that designing and testing technologies with children is 
useful to develop robots that accommodate their needs and that are understandable for them. We 
summarized a set of guidelines that can inform the design of robots for children. Additionally, 
we provided insights on how to use this design process in the field of HRI in general, thus 
creating robots that are aligned with human needs. Despite the richness of this design process, 
there are a few limitations that we would like to acknowledge. A major limitation of this work is 
that we have not compared to other processes of robot design. For future work, it would be 
interesting to compare different approaches in robot design (with different levels of user 
engagement) and conduct usability studies that would reflect which design process led to better 
results. We highlight again that this section was about the design process of the robot, and that 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
176 
the evaluation of the effectiveness of using this robot in creativity interventions is detailed in 
Chapter 6. In the next section, we will detail on the hardware fabrication for YOLO robot. 
Building YOLO 
In this section, we detail the process of building the physical body, or the hardware, of 
YOLO (see Figure 26). The source file repository with all materials and instructions necessary to 
build YOLO were made available in open-access in Open Science Framework11. This constitutes 
our second stage of developing this social robot (see Figure 20). As mentioned, HRI is a field of 
research dedicated to the design and evaluation of robotic systems that interact with humans 
(Goodrich & Schultz, 2008). These robots have been designed with the ability to “communicate 
and interact with us, understand and even relate to us, in a personal way” (Breazeal, 2004). They 
have been designed with different embodiments, using a rich taxonomy of expressive behaviors 
(Fong, Nourbakhsh, & Dautenhahn, 2003), classified according to the environment in which they 
operate, and to the intended application field (Ben-Ari & Mondada, 2018). Additionally, their 
interaction modalities range from emotional expression (Paiva, Mascarenhas, Petisca, Correia, & 
Alves-Oliveira, 2018) - including empathy (Paiva, Leite, Boukricha, & Wachsmuth, 2017), body 
gestures (Salem, Eyssel, Rohlfing, Kopp, & Joublin, 2013; Salem, Kopp, Wachsmuth, Rohlfing, 
& Joublin, 2012), and expressive lights (Baraka, 2018) - to color, motion, and sound (Löffler, 
Schmidt, & Tscharn, 2018). Highly successful interactions with humans tend to occur when the 
interactive and expressive modalities of robots match their physical embodiment (Mori, 1970). 
When a mismatch is perceived between the physical appearance of a human-like robot and its 
behavior, feelings of eeriness and revulsion may arise, denoting the so-called Uncanny Valley 
Effect that robot designers want to avoid (Mori, 1970). To counter this effect, we chose to  
 
11Open Science Framework weblink for all materials and instructions to build YOLO: https://osf.io/kwrft/ 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
177 
 
Figure 6. Perspective views of YOLO from left to right: top, top-side, side, bottom-side, and 
bottom. Retrieved from Alves-Oliveira, Arriaga, Paiva, and Hoffman (2019). 
 
 
develop a non-anthropomorphic robot using non-verbal elements, such as colors and movement, 
to communicate with children (see Figure 27). 
Interaction Elements of YOLO 
To sustain playful and creative interactions with children, YOLO makes use of implicit 
interaction modalities, such as movements and lights, to communicate with children (Ju, 2015). 
YOLO’s interactive elements are described below. 
Lights and Movement as Interaction Modalities. Lights and movement were chosen as 
the main interaction modalities between the robot and children as this combination was 
recognized as one of the most efficient nonverbal multi-modal communication for non-
anthropomorphic robots (Löffler, Schmidt, & Tscharn, 2018). YOLO interacts with children by 
making use of lights that display different colors creating different emotional expressions by 
using different scales of brightness levels that create a so-called “blinking” or “breathing” 
behavior. For example, when the robot exhibits more introvert traits, it would use less light- 
 
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
178 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Detailed views on YOLO robot. Retrieved from Alves-Oliveira, Arriaga, Paiva, and 
Hoffman (2019). 
 
blinking behaviors with smooth transitions between them; when exhibiting an extrovert trait, the 
light-blinking behavior would happen with more frequency and at faster speeds of transition. 
Additionally, movement is used for interaction with YOLO performing different navigation 
patterns at varying speeds. In this sense, the robot senses how children move it (the robot can 
recognize the manipulation patterns of children while grabbing it) and reacts to these behaviors. 
For example, if children perform angular movements patterns with the robot (pretending, e.g., 
that the robot is avoiding obstacles, similarly to what children do when they play with car toys), 
the robot detects these and can react to them either by imitating them or by doing a different 
movement. In this case, the robot is reacting to a movement previously performed by children, in 
what we called “reactive behavior”. On the other hand, the robot can initiate an autonomous 
behavior to stimulate new ideas during playtime, in what we called “proactive behavior”, which 
means that the robot, without being previously manipulated by children, can start moving around 
to call their attention for playing. 
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
179 
Abstract Shape as Imagination Trigger. YOLO has a minimal abstract body shape as 
an invitation to children’s imagination. Literature states that conceiving states of fantasy in 
which reality constraints have been dropped serve as a technique to increase idea generation 
(Smith, 1998). Therefore, by designing an embodiment that does not resemble previously known 
objects, YOLO can serve as any character that children wish for their stories, increasing idea 
generation (which is part of the divergent thinking in creative thought). The abstractness of the 
robot is envisioned to amplify imagination possibilities for children’s stories, inciting them into 
creating a wide range of storylines that contribute to their creative thinking. 
Touch for Shared Control. Children are usually in full control of their toys. However, 
this is not the case when they interact with autonomous robots, as interactive technology 
performs actions that are not controllable by children due to their autonomous nature. During an 
interaction, this can lead to positive effects, such as engagement due to novelty, but can also 
create frustration and sometimes even fear in children, possibly leading to interaction 
breakdowns with robots (Serholt, 2018). To address this aspect, YOLO has a shared control 
option that gives control over the interaction back control to children, similarly to what occurs 
during interactions with their traditional toys. This was made possible by using capacitive touch 
sensors in the robot's shell. When children touch the robot, the capacitive touch sensor is 
activated and the robot refrains from performing any autonomous behavior. During this 
deactivated time, children can play with it as they do with traditional toys. When children release 
the robot, which means that the capacitive sensor does not recognize touch, the robot returns to 
its fully autonomous mode. This shared control enables children to have the control they are used 
to with their traditional toys at certain levels of the interaction, and at the same time enables the 
robot to perform autonomously. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
180 
 
 
Figure 8.  YOLO’s drawing with main dimensions in mm. Retrieved from Alves-Oliveira, 
Arriaga, Paiva, and Hoffman (2019). 
 
Technical Elements 
In this section, we detail YOLO’s technical elements related to its hardware design. 
Small-Scale and Light-Weight Design. YOLO is a 167 x 120 mm robot with three 
omni-wheels that enable navigation and manipulation in any direction (see Figure 28). It was 
designed to be a small-scale and light-weight robot meant for children's hands' size and easy 
manipulation. With most robots, the space required by electronic circuits, wires, and power, 
make small-size and light-weight designs hard to achieve. Most off-the-shelf robots for children 
are heavy to hold, e.g., the NAO robot (Gouaillier, et al., 2009) weights 5.4 Kg. In its final 
version, YOLO weights approximately 0.5 Kg, the equivalent of a basketball, and its half-
hourglass shape enables an easy grabbing for children’s hand size (see Figures 27 and 28). 
Child-Proof Design. YOLO’s shell was fabricated using 3D printing material, with 
options for laser cutting. The robot’s interior components (such as screws and standoffs) are 
made of nylon to avoid shorts between electrical boards. The circuitry and electronic boards 
were assembled in a compact and robust layered design to be safely manipulated by children  
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
181 
 
Figure 9. YOLO’s exploded view (on the left) and section analysis with component coloring (on 
the right). Retrieved from Alves-Oliveira, Arriaga, Paiva, and Hoffman (2019). 
 
(see Figure 29).These materials and assembly processes make YOLO child-proof, 
accommodating for unrestricted and uncertain manipulations of the robot during play. 
Grab-and-Go Play. YOLO was designed as a standalone and portable robot for a playful 
grab-and-go mindset. To enable portability, the robot has a robust internal power system, 
providing energy to all internal components. Compact power designs for robots are hard to 
achieve due to the large size of commercially available batteries, commonly presenting non-
ergonomic shapes. Most robots for children are mostly stationary and dependent on power 
outlets to function, e.g., MyKeepon is a small and light-weighted robot for children (Kozima, 
Michalowski, & Nakagawa, 2009), however, it is a power outlet dependent robot. YOLO’s 
portability enables free play both indoors and outdoors, not constraining it to pre-determined 
spaces. This is similar to what happens when children play with their traditional toys. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
182 
Table 13. Design files to build YOLO. Retrieved from Alves-Oliveira, Arriaga, Paiva, and 
Hoffman (2019). 
Design file name 
File type 
License 
Location of the file 
Shell 
CAD file in STL 
CC BY 4.0 
https://osf.io/xdgf5/ 
Batteries layer 
CAD file in STL 
CC BY 4.0 
https://osf.io/3dgyb/ 
Boards layer 
CAD file in STL 
CC BY 4.0 
https://osf.io/4gj65/ 
Wheels layer 
CAD file in STL 
CC BY 4.0 
https://osf.io/hyb56/ 
Glowing fibers layer 
CAD file in STL 
CC BY 4.0 
https://osf.io/bqg4f/ 
Washer 
CAD file in STL 
CC BY 4.0 
https://osf.io/5pdwj/ 
Motor docking (1) 
CAD file in STL 
CC BY 4.0 
https://osf.io/crz7j/ 
Motor docking (2) 
CAD file in STL 
CC BY 4.0 
https://osf.io/eruac/ 
 
Design Files 
YOLO can be build using the design files included in Table 13 and represented in Figure 
30. The design files are in STL format and ready to be 3D printed. Some of these files can be 
converted to a DXF format, adding a laser cutting option for faster and cheaper opportunities to 
fabricate YOLO. If opting to laser cut some of the components, note that the thickness of the 
laser cutting material should correspond to the CAD model dimensions. We suggest choosing a 
material for the laser cutter work that protects electronic boards, such as acrylic. Below is a 
summary of the design files presented in Table 10.  
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
183 
 
Figure 10. YOLO parts lineup. Retrieved from Alves-Oliveira, Arriaga, Paiva, and Hoffman 
(2019). 
 
 
• Shell - File with the cover of the robot. This is the largest 3D printing file and requires a 
3D printer capable of operating at large dimensions - at least 120 x 200 x 200 mm of 
printing capability. Use a vertical bottom-up position for printing the shell. Support 
material should be added on the faces of the three tabs. This design file does not present a 
laser cutting option as it is made of 3D organic shapes not ideal for laser cutting work. 
• Batteries, boards, and wheel layers - These design files are composed of three circular 
platforms that should be placed on the interior of the shell to hold all the electronic 
components in place (see Figure 29). Print the layers horizontally. Support material is 
needed only on the face of the counter-bore holes of the larger platform. The laser cutting 
option is valid for this design file. 
• Jewel layer - This file contains the design that serves to nest the LED jewel that will be 
attached from the top of the shell (see Figure 29). Print the LED nest horizontally with  
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
184 
Figure 11. Close-ups on YOLO’s inside. Retrieved from Alves-Oliveira, Arriaga, Paiva, and 
Hoffman (2019). 
 
support material. This file does not support a laser cutting option due to its 3D design 
requirement. 
• Glowing fibers layer - This design file contains the plate where the optical fibers should 
be glued (see Figure 29). Print the LED nest horizontally with support material. The laser 
cutting option is valid for this design file. 
• Washer - Washers should be placed between the “Jewel layer” and the “glowing fibers 
layer” to secure this connection (see Figure 29). YOLO uses three washers to support this 
connection, so consider printing 3 parts. The laser cutting option is valid for this design 
file. 
• Motor docking (1) and (2) - Composed of two files that together provide docking for the 
motors. Support material is not needed for 3D printing. The laser cutting option is valid 
for “Motor docking (2)”. 
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
185 
Bill of Materials 
The total estimated expenses for building YOLO is approximately $200. Although this 
cost might strike as expensive for a home-made robot, the total estimated price includes 
purchases of items that come in large packs, such as battery clips and wire zip ties, or that come 
with extra material quantities, such as wires and screws. A concrete example is the battery clips 
that come in packs of 10, while YOLO requires only 1; wires have an extension of 25ft and 
YOLO requires short extensions due to its compact design. The total estimated price can be 
reduced if YOLO is built in a laboratory or a maker space that already has some of the tools and 
materials for building and assembling. A description of the total bill of materials is presented in 
Appendix B. 
Assembly 
We now provide instructions for the robot’s assembly process. 
Assembly Preparation. The assembly requires the following tools: hacksaw, utility 
knife, screwdriver set, calipers, scissors, soldering kit (including solder spool, soldering station, 
wire stripper, diagonal cutters, solder wick for solder removal, soldering vise with a magnifying 
glass, and a panavise), and glue. 3D print and laser cut the required materials in present in 
Appendix B and Figure 30. Before assembly, configure the voltage transformer with an input of 
5.0V and step down the buck converter output for 1.5V. Additionally, follow the steps described 
below: 
1. Hack mouse sensor that will serve as an in-built system for motion detection of the 
robot12; 
2. Place brass inserts in the dedicated places using a soldering iron (Figure 32. steps 1-3)13; 
 
12 A tutorial video on how to hack a mouse can be found using this weblink: https://youtu.be/Jz-cXqAwu4o 
13 A tutorial video on how to heat brass inserts can be found using this weblink: https://youtu.be/HB2Q_Wywl1s 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
186 
 
Figure 12. YOLO’s assembly flow. Numbering accompanied by the symbol “
” correspond to 
materials on Appendix B. Retrieved from Alves-Oliveira, Arriaga, Paiva, and Hoffman (2019). 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
187 
3. Cut the circboard and drill two 2.10 in clearance holes for attachment14; 
4. Cut glowing fibers and attach them to the glowing fibers layer by using a hot glue gun or 
other effective glue. The length of the size of the glowing fibers can be selected by 
personal preference. We used lengths between 140-170 mm15. 
Assembly Flow. A step-by-step assembly flow with an action Diagram (Agrawala et al., 
2003) is present in Figure 32. Follow each step and complement the assembly flow with the 
wiring instructions in Figure 33. An exploded view of YOLO that supports the understanding of 
the final robot configuration is present in Figure 29, with close-up views on 1. When the robot is 
fully assembled, attach a batch of copper tape to the shell of the robot to connect the wire that 
comes from the capacitive touch sensor. This will enable the robot to respond to touch. 
Assembly Safeguards. Assembling YOLO is a process that involves interacting with 
mechanical tools and machinery for which safety guards are required. To the best of our 
knowledge, no safety guidelines for personal fabrication have been formally established, and 
misuses have been considered users’ responsibility (Mota, 2011). As such, we strongly advise 
YOLO makers to follow our recommended safeguards. 
It is advisable to assemble the robot under expert adult supervision at all times. Additionally, 
assembling this robot requires knowledge over some mechanical engineering procedures, such as 
soldering. We recommend a tutorial about soldering by Mitch Altman, Andie Nordgren, and Jeff 
Keyzer, “Soldering is Easy”16. We advise to train the art of soldering using a training board, and 
only after mastering this art, start soldering YOLO. The physical presence of an expert person 
 
14 A tutorial video on how to cut a circuit board can be found using this weblink: https://youtu.be/ummbqeoAhJY 
15 A tutorial vídeo on how to cut and attach glowing fibers can be found using this weblink: 
https://youtu.be/7TzWtuXsoN8 
16 A free online version of the tutorial “Soldering is Easy” by Mitch Altman, Andie Nordgren, and Jeff Keyzer,  
https://mightyohm.com/files/soldercomic/FullSolderComic_EN.pdf 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
188 
Figure 13. Wiring schematics of YOLO with visual components (on the left) and circuit schema 
(on the right). Retrieved from Alves-Oliveira, Arriaga, Paiva, and Hoffman (2019). 
 
during soldering, wiring, and 3D printing or laser cutting is recommended. 
Operation Instructions 
To operate YOLO, consider the schematics present in Figure 34. YOLO can display 
different social behaviors. Therefore, it can be used as a creativity-stimulating robot for 
children’s playtime17. In this case, YOLO will be interacting with children playfully, while 
seeking to stimulate their creativity. Another way is to develop a software to operate YOLO. 
This can be performed by any person with some knowledge of programming. In this case, 
YOLO’s software can be developed and personalized according to the needs and goals of the 
developers. To develop software for YOLO use a Python script-based language and Raspberry-
Pi's specifications which will be explained further ahead in this Chapter when we explain the 
software of YOLO.  
 
 
 
 
17 Download an available version of the software with pre-sets that we have developed available at 
https://github.com/patricialvesoliveira/YOLO-Software 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
189 
Table 14. Materials and their usages required to initialize YOLO. Retrieved from Alves-Oliveira, 
Arriaga, Paiva, and Hoffman (2019). 
 
Material 
Usage 
YOLO robot 
Artifact that will be operated. 
Router 
To connect the Raspberry Pi and to the software program via wi-fi. 
Computer/laptop 
To initialize YOLO’s software program. 
 
To start operating YOLO, combine the materials required to initialize the robot present in 
Table 14 with the operating instructions in Figure 34. It is important to note that the performance 
of the robot is dependent on battery life, router range, and strong wiring connections. Regarding 
the battery, the average life is between 5-7 hours. This average can fluctuate depending on the 
playing behavior of children, i.e., if children interact more with YOLO, the battery life will 
decrease as the robot is prompt to perform more behaviors. If one or more omni-wheels start to 
not move, substitute the 9V battery, as there might be a power shortage. For full performance, 
YOLO’s batteries need to be properly charged. Therefore, if the robot is non-responsive, 
recharge the power bank and try again when it is full. If YOLO continues non-responsive, check 
the wiring connections as they might need extra soldering as the unrestricted movements during 
children’s play can weaken the connections. As the router range is wide, children can play with 
YOLO both indoors and outdoors. If YOLO starts being non-responsive, consider a smaller 
distance between the robot and the router.  
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
190 
 
Figure 14. Operating instructions for YOLO. Retrieved from Alves-Oliveira, Arriaga, Paiva, and 
Hoffman (2019). 
 
Operation Safeguards. YOLO is a robot made for children. Due to its target group and 
playful application nature, there are no major hazards when operating and playing with it. 
However, like any other technological toy, children should be supervised by an adult at all times. 
Additionally, a responsible adult should be in charge of initializing YOLO. 
Discussion 
YOLO presents as a low-cost-purchase and low-cost-maintenance cost robot, that can be 
used as a tool for research studies with children. The open-source hardware of YOLO thus 
provides opportunities for researchers with and without engineering background to build this 
robot and further use it targeting their own research goals, without depending upon complex 
robotic platforms. To demonstrate how this robot can be applied to academia, researchers can use 
it as a platform to explore the design of behaviors for a robot aimed at interacting with children. 
Another example is the usage of this robot by the social and cognitive sciences field as a 
controllable and programmable tool, to study the developmental aspects of children when 
interacting with robots. Predominantly, the scientific community relies on the usage of off-the-
shelf robots as their research platforms when performing studies. Nonetheless, off-the-shelf 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
191 
robotics platforms are generally expensive (with purchase prices ranging from $5.000 to 
$20.000, or more) and associated with high maintenance costs. Also, the majority of these robots 
require special transportation services to be used during field studies, due to their robust size and 
heavyweight, placing additional costs for academic laboratories. YOLO offers a less expensive 
yet interesting solution for research. In the next section, we detail the software development for 
YOLO robot. 
Programming YOLO 
In this section, we detail the artificial intelligence of the software that gives life to the 
social robot YOLO. This constitutes our third and last stage of developing this social robot. We 
released in open access YOLO’s code in GitHub18. The code is accompanied by a step-by-step 
tutorial that can be used by a novice user. Additionally, we developed an Application 
Programming Interface (API), which is an interface or a communication protocol between 
different parts of the program intended to facilitate the implementation of new behaviors for 
YOLO. This API is provided in GitHub in open access.  
Software Description 
YOLO’s software is composed of creativity and social behaviors whose design was 
grounded on creativity research (Smith, 1998) the Big Five personality model (Costa Jr & 
McCrae, 2008; John, & Srivastava, 1999), and co-design sessions with children (Alves-Oliveira, 
Arriaga, Paiva, & Hoffman, 2017; see also the section “Designing YOLO” in the Chapter). We 
detail on the description of the robot’s behaviors and how they compose the architecture of the 
software below. 
 
18GitHub weblink with the code to program YOLO: https://github.com/patricialvesoliveira/YOLO-Software 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
192 
 
Figure 15. Storytelling arcs associated with creativity techniques: convergent thinking is 
stimulated during rising and falling action phases by using the mirror technique; divergent 
thinking is stimulated during climax by using the contrast technique. Retrieved from Alves-
Oliveira, Gomes, Chandak, Arriaga, Hoffman, and Paiva (2019). 
 
 
Creativity Behavior. In our specific application scenario, YOLO acts as a character that 
can trigger new directions in children’s stories that otherwise would not emerge. During story 
creation, a combination of divergent (i.e., broad gathering of multiple ideas) and convergent 
thinking (i.e., narrowing down possibilities to create a coherent story plot) is required (Brenner, 
Uebernickel, & Abrell, 2016; Elbow, 1983, Alrutz, 2015). This constituted our theoretical 
foundation to design the creativity-stimulating behavior in YOLO. As mentioned earlier, we 
choose two techniques to stimulate creativity, named “contrast” and “mirror” derived from co-
designing sessions with children, from the literature review, and considering the feedback 
collected with creative experts that work with children (see Section Designing YOLO in this 
Chapter).  These techniques are described below. (see Figure 35). 
• Contrast - This technique is used to stimulate divergent thinking (Rickards, 1975). In the 
Contrast technique, YOLO provides stimuli unrelated to the storyline that children are 
exploring at the moment, producing an opportunity to explore new directions in the plot. 
This leads to heightened action and interesting plot twists in the stories of children; 
convergent
thinking
falling action
climax
raising action
divergent
thinking
convergent
thinking
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
193 
• Mirror - This technique is used to stimulate convergent thinking (Vangundy, 1988). 
When using the Mirror technique, YOLO provides stimuli that are connected with the 
storyline that children are exploring, leading to the elaboration and convergence of story 
ideas. This leads to the emergence of interesting details about a character, a scenario, or 
an action in the story. 
YOLO chooses which technique to use according to the storytelling arc of the story. 
Storytelling Arc. Successful and satisfying stories follow a storytelling arc (Freytag, 1872, 
1896). According to the Theory of Dramatic Structure, each story has five acts: exposition, rising 
action, climax, falling action, and dénouement. These five acts can be modified and adapted to 
the dramatic structure of short stories, fables, or fairytales. In our software, we considered a 
short-story format similar to what is used in children’s stories (Wright, 1995). Therefore, we 
divide the narrative of a story in the following phases: 
• Rising action - Characters are introduced, a context is given to the story, and the story 
builds. During this stage, YOLO stimulates convergent thinking by using the mirror 
creativity technique; 
• Climax - The story reaches the point of greatest tension. During this stage, YOLO 
stimulates divergent thinking by applying the contrast creativity technique; 
• Falling action - The story shifts to an action that happens because of the climax, which 
means that the conflict is resolved, and the story reaches its end. During this stage, 
YOLO stimulates convergent thinking by using the mirror creativity technique. 
YOLO was designed to display social behaviors, increasing its richness as a character in 
children’s stories. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
194 
Social Behavior. YOLO expresses different social profiles to exhibit social behaviors. The 
profiles are named Exuberant, Aloof, and Harmonious. These social behaviors appear as pre-sets 
when YOLO is turned on and can be used interchangeably, making the robot a flexible character 
in the children’s stories. An explanation for the robot’s social behaviors is provided below. 
• Exuberant - YOLO reacts to every social interaction in an “enthusiastic” manner. 
Movements are fast and have a high amplitude. It displays vibrant colors such as purple 
and red with high brightness levels. As Exuberant, YOLO is proactive and seeks out 
social interaction. This is a vibrant, frenetic, and daring social profile; 
• Aloof - YOLO is less “socially reactive” and is a “shy robot”. In this mode, the robot 
exhibits low amplitude, slow movements and displays cold colors such as green and blue 
with low brightness levels. As Aloof, YOLO is not proactive; does not seek interactions. 
This profile could also be described as a loner, contemplative, or reclusive; 
• Harmonious - YOLO acts in a moderated fashion, presenting behaviors that are in-
between the extreme versions of Exuberant and Aloof. As Harmonious, YOLO exhibits 
medium speed, movements with medium amplitude, and displays warm colors such as 
yellow and orange at medium brightness levels. This is a balanced and moderate profile. 
Software Functionalities 
A primary function of this software is to serve as an API that enables any user the 
opportunity to design personalized behaviors for YOLO, consequently providing the possibility 
to generate new behaviors and interaction modes19. The robot can receive information from the 
environment (input) and express different interactive behaviors towards (output). Table 15 lists 
pre-sets that were developed for YOLO to act as a social robot that can stimulate creativity in 
 
19Guide for YOLO’s API: https://github.com/patricialvesoliveira/YOLO-Software/wiki/API-Documentation 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
195 
children. Examples of the behaviors that can be parameterized are colors, sequence, and 
brightness of the LED lights. Additionally, the movements produced by the robot can be changed 
concerning the patterns, amplitude, and speed of the movements. Simple behaviors can be 
composed into complex robot behaviors. These complex behaviors aggregate several simple 
allowing for high level control of several behaviors of the robot. 
Since each aspect of the robot is controllable and parameterizable, behaviors can be 
tweaked, created and mixed. To demonstrate the API functionality, we conducted pilot testing 
sessions in which we asked two participants unfamiliar with YOLO software to create different 
behaviors for the robot. One of the participants had a background in Computer Science and the 
other in Psychology. The participants were instructed to choose beloved characters from 
animation movies and to create a behavior for the robot that would resemble the behavior of 
those characters. The examples created by the participants were Mickey, Barbie, Bugs Bunny, 
and Genie from Aladdin20. 
Software Architecture 
The architecture of our software includes several modules that manipulate data at 
different levels of abstraction from the low-level sensors and actuators to high-level behaviors. 
Figure 36 shows the scheme of these modules and how they interact. Each module, namely 
Control, Behaviors, and Planning, are explained below. 
Control. This module has two main functions: first, it extracts data associated with the 
robots' sensors and translates into a programmable format. Second, it instructs the actuators what 
to do based on the software calls. 
 
 
20Examples created by the participants using the API: https://github.com/patricialvesoliveira/YOLO-
Software/wiki/Examples 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
196 
Table 15. Software functionalities considering the sensors used, the input collected, the actuators 
in place, and the output provided. Retrieved from Alves-Oliveira, et al (2019). 
 
Sensor 
Input 
Actuator 
Output 
Touch sensor 
Ability to recognize when 
the robot is being touched. 
LED lights. 
The robot displays white lights while being 
touched, refrains from performing any behavior. 
When not sensing touch, the robot displays 
colors associated with its different social 
behaviors. 
Optical 
sensor 
Recognition of play 
patterns of children while 
manipulating the robot. 
Omni wheels. 
Imitating the collected movement patterns. 
Time 
Stage of the storytelling 
that children are currently 
engaged in. 
Omni wheels 
and LED 
lights. 
The robot performs a creativity technique 
according to the storytelling arc. 
 
The touch sensor of YOLO indicates the robot is recognizing physical contact, and the 
optical sensor observes the differences in position to detect the direction of movement. The 
sensors record movement at each moment. The shape recognizer dynamically identifies and 
characterizes each movement using Machine Learning. The pre-trained K-Nearest-Neighbor 
(KNN) algorithm determines a shape using the robot motion sensors which capture coordinates 
in 3 seconds intervals (Altman, 1992). Figure 37 depicts the Machine Learning (ML) workflow. 
We trained the model by collecting raw coordinates and converting these coordinates into a 
feature vector using the convex hull algorithm (Barber, Dobkin, Dobkin, & Huhdanpaa, 1996)21. 
 
 
21More details about the shape recognizer algorithm are present at this link: 
https://github.com/patricialvesoliveira/YOLO-Software/wiki/Algorithm 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
197 
 
Figure 16. Architecture of the modules that compose YOLO software. Retrieved from Alves-
Oliveira, et al (2019). 
 
Every time a movement is detected, KNN is used to determine the closest matching shape 
from the training data. Simulations with a computer mouse showed us that with n = 3, KNN 
provided high accuracy (94%). Therefore, we used this parameterization. The current ML model 
was trained with the physical robot and can recognize with an 80% success rate the following 
shapes: circle, rectangles, loops, curls, spikes, and a straight line (see Figure 38). 
YOLO actuators include the Wheel Actuator and the LED Actuator. While the Wheel 
Actuator receives direction and speed values and moves the wheels' motors accordingly, the LED 
Actuator receives a color and brightness level and displays it in the robot’s jewel LEDs. 
 
 
SenVorV
Agent
Control
Planning
PaUaPeWeUi]eV
AcWXaWorV
TRXcK SeQVRU
OSWLcaO SeQVRU
WKeeO AcWXaWRU
LED AcWXaWRU
GeWV iQfR fURP
SeQdV iQfR WR
Behaviors
CRPSRVed BeKaYLRUV
SLPSOe BeKaYLRUV
UVeV
CRQWaiQV
<AcWXaWRU callV>
<SeQVRU daWa>
SKaSe RecRJQLWLRQ
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
198 
 
Figure 17. Workflow of the ML algorithm for shape recognition used by YOLO. Retrieved from 
Alves-Oliveira, et al (2019). 
 
 
Behaviors. The Behaviors module coordinates the simultaneous execution of different 
actuators based on given parameters. The intended behavior arises from the simultaneous 
execution of different actuators. To simplify the development process, we divided behaviors into 
more concrete Simple Behaviors, which directly use the actuator data and Composed Behaviors, 
which unite several simple behaviors. Simple behaviors directly call the Control module. These 
behaviors consist of assigning different light behaviors (different colors, animations, and 
brightness) to different movement configurations (different movement patterns at varying 
speed)22. Composed behaviors can be used to define the social behaviors which YOLO exhibits, 
such as Exuberant, Aloof, and Harmonious23. 
 
 
 
22Examples of simple behaviors are detailed at this link: https://github.com/patricialvesoliveira/YOLO-
Software/wiki/SimpleBehavior-Hierarchy 
23Composed behaviors are further explained at this link: https://github.com/patricialvesoliveira/YOLO-
Software/wiki/ComposedBehavior 
Raw input coordinates
Find bounded 
Rectangle, Triangle, 
Circle, using convex 
hull and generate 
feature vector
Run through pre-trained 
KNN model
Determine shapes
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
199 
 
Figure 18. The lines illustrate the movement shapes performed by YOLO that are recognized by 
our algorithm. Illustrated shapes are: circle, rects, loops, curls, spikes, and straight line. Retrieved 
from Alves-Oliveira, et al (2019). 
 
 
Planning. The Planning module schedules the behaviors in each moment of the 
interaction, executing specific ones based on the current interaction state. In order to trigger new 
interaction states, Planning module uses the data extracted from the sensors which the Control 
module provides. A flowchart illustrating the Planning module’s is depicted in Figure 39.  
Illustrative Example 
To exemplify our software, we present a case-interaction between a child and the robot, 
as an example of how the artificial intelligence performs. The child was instructed to create a 
story, using the robot as a character. In the box below, we transcribed part of the interaction (see  
complementary Figure 40). In this example, it is visible how the robot makes use of its 
interaction profiles to stimulate convergent and divergent thinking and how this relates to the 
different stages of the storytelling. 
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
200 
 
 
Figure 19. State machine diagram representing the schedule of the procedures executed in the 
Planning module. Retrieved from Alves-Oliveira, et al (2019). 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
201 
 
 
 
Figure 20. Use-case example of a child using YOLO as a character for the creativity-stimulating 
storytelling scenario. Retrieved from Alves-Oliveira, et al (2019). 
 
 
The child is on the floor playing with YOLO. 
Child: “This is a football field and YOLO is from the Benfica team, so we are going to win!” 
The child manipulates YOLO in the imaginary football field, imitating the robot running after 
an imaginary ball and deviating from imaginary team adversaries. Because YOLO is still in 
the first part of the storytelling arc, i.e., in the Raising Action stage, the robot will stimulate 
convergent thinking abilities. Therefore, the robot imitates the last movement that the child 
performed. The child looks at the robot while it is moving. 
Child: “Yes! Go for it, Cádiz, score!” (Cádiz is the name of a Benfica team player that the 
child gave to the robot). 
The child imitates scoring a goal and then grabs YOLO and celebrates. 
Child: “Ok Cádiz, but we have to continue doing well. These other guys are good too.” 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
202 
The child continues manipulating YOLO through the adversaries. At this point in time, YOLO 
entered the next storytelling arc which is the Climax. During climax, divergent thinking is 
stimulated so the robot will perform a movement that is different from the last movement that 
the child has performed. The child manipulates the robot straight ahead towards the soccer 
goal, but the robot goes the opposite direction. 
Child: “What happened? Oh no, the other guys hit you in the knee. Assistance is needed 
here!” 
The game continues. 
 
Discussion 
We detailed on the software which allows the YOLO robot to encourage creativity 
stimulation in children. Specifically, we have detailed on the creativity and social behavior 
programming, as well as the underlying architecture of the software that relies on the storytelling 
arc and the play movements performed by children. We also presented how the software 
connects with the hardware. 
The impact of this software is broad. By being an easy-to-use tool, children’s 
stakeholders such as educators and parents, have access to a robot that is easy to prepare by using 
our API (e.g., STEAM-related activities), contrasting with other existing technological tools that 
can be cumbersome for non-experts to prepare (Chan & Yuen, 2014). Additionally, this software 
serves as a solid platform in academic studies, where researchers can use YOLO’s API to study 
child-robot interaction. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
203 
Conclusion 
 
This Chapter detailed the full process of designing, building, and programming YOLO. 
To create a tool for creativity that children will easily adopt in their lives, we used UCD 
procedures and applied PD methods from design research. With this, we developed and adapted 
methods to support children’s involvement in the design of robots. This created a research tool 
developed in turn of user-centered values. Since robots have been mainly developed without 
including its end-users in the process, our work in one of the first to involve children during all 
the stages of the robot design throughout its final conception, influencing the design decisions 
about the shape and behavior of the robot. 
To support the development of this robot we relied in formative research methods and 
performed intermediate studies of the robot at different design and fabrication stages. These 
studied provided immediate data towards what was led to the desired interaction, with specific 
requirements of open-ended playfulness for creativity provocations. It also provided data towards 
elements that needed refinement in the robot design. The result was an abstract-like robot that 
uses lights and movements as its interactive modalities. These interaction modes are non-
intrusive in children’s play providing at the same time necessary elements to provoke creativity. 
See Chapter 6 for an experimental study of the effectiveness of YOLO as a tool for creativity 
enhancement). 
Limitations and Recommendations for Future Research 
 
We would like to acknowledge improvements for future research, derived from the 
limitations of this work. As mentioned earlier, we have not empirically compared our design 
process with other design methods, therefore, we cannot say it is the best design procedure for 
robot development. As future work, it would be important to formalize each of the developed 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
204 
methodologies and procedures by comparing the effectiveness of a social robot for creativity 
across developed under different design methodologies. This will enable a deeper evaluation of 
the design process of robots with children, specifically describing what aspects of the process 
made the outcome better in terms of creativity stimulation; however, this was beyond the scope 
of this thesis. 
Highlights 
• Description of the design process of a robot for creativity, involving its end-users 
(children) at the heart of the design process, influencing design decisions 
• Description of the fabrication of YOLO, including the development of a tutorial for 
novice users to build YOLO; 
• Description of the programming architecture used for this robot, including a tutorial for 
novice users to program YOLO; 
• Released in open access all the materials for developing this robot, which can serve as a 
research tool and as an object for the community. 
Implications for this Thesis 
The major implication of this work was the development of a social robot for empirical 
studies about creativity.  In this thesis, we made a deliberate decision to refrain from using 
existing general-purpose robots and develop our own robotic tool specifically for creativity 
enhancement. The development of this robot implied learning about mechanical design as well as 
basic programming skills. The design process of this robot also enabled a deeper understanding 
of the application scenario for this robot, which consisted of a storytelling activity with children. 
In the next Chapter, we describe an experimental study with YOLO being used as a creativity-
enhancing research tool. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
205 
Chapter 6. Experimental evidence of robots as tools for creativity stimulation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This chapter was based on the following papers: 
Alves-Oliveira, P., Arriaga, P., Cronin, M. A., & Paiva, A. (2020, March). Creativity Encounters 
Between Children and Robots. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Human-
Robot Interaction (pp 379-388). ACM/IEEE. doi:10.1145/3319502.3374817 
Correia, F., Petisca, S., Alves-Oliveira, P., Ribeiro, T., Melo, F. S., & Paiva, A. (2017). Groups 
of humans and robots: Understanding membership preferences and team formation. 
In Robotics: Science and Systems. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
206 
Theoretical Background 
We revise literature on variables related to creativity, namely personality and motivation; 
as well as provide an overview of the state of the art about using robots that interact with humans 
in the context of creativity stimulation. 
Variables Related with Creativity 
Creativity is an ability that can be influenced by other variables, such as personality and 
motivation. Some personality traits are associated with more creative success. Previous work 
suggests that people with high levels of autonomy, with ambition, that are confident, extravert, 
and open to new experiences were more creative (Feist, 1998). Individuals that have a high 
extraversion trait are generally more effective in divergent thinking tasks (Furnham, & Bachtiar, 
2008). Additionally, motivation, namely intrinsic motivation also appears to be highly related to 
creativity (Hennessey, 2016). The high motivation of intrinsically motivated individuals has the 
effect of engaging them in the task (Tan, Lau, Kung, & Kailsan, 2019). However, activities that 
have external constrains can also undermine intrinsic motivation even in individuals that are 
usually highly intrinsically motivated. Thus, creativity depends on many factors related to the 
individual and the task itself (Koestner, Ryan, Bernieri, & Holt, 1984). 
Group dynamics also play a role in creativity, as collective emerge occurs which is 
denoted by the unpredictability of the other creations and the need for one’s to adapt and keep up 
with the creative emergence (Sawyer, 2010). Additionally, the characteristics of every person in 
the group also bring richness top the creative context that in individual creations is not possible 
to attain (Paulus, & Nijstad, 2003). Thus, despite finding on individual creativity being more 
extensively reported in the literature, group creativity seems to bring a new layer to creations. 
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
207 
Interventions for Creativity with Robots 
Children’s play has undergone a shift since the rise of the digital era where computers 
and video-games are substituting traditional play formats, such as physical and unstructured play 
in sandboxes and playgrounds. One of the reasons pointed out for this change relates with the 
willingness of children to interact with technology (Salonius-Pasternak, & Gelfond, 2005), 
associated with controversial effects on their development if overused (Gillespie, 2002; 
Greitemeyer, & Mügge, 2014; Sublette, & Mullan, 2012). However, when used with caution and 
care (Hutchby, & Moran-Ellis, 2013; Shields, & Behrman, 2000), technology can have positive 
effects in children across various aspects such as creativity expression and other transferable 
skills (Druin, & Solomon, 1996; Lewis, 2009; Papert, 1980; Pires, Alves-Oliveira, Arriaga, & 
Martinho, 2017). 
Robots have been programmed with a deep variety of socially intelligent behaviors and 
affective states; thus, permitting robots to be perceived as social actors (Reeves, & Nass, 1996; 
Breazeal, 2004a). Additionally, due to their physical and interactive nature, they become a 
technology that can uniquely impact creativity stimulation. Ali, Moroso, and Breazeal (2019), 
demonstrated that a robot displaying creative behaviors positively influenced the creativity of 
children. The authors found that children who interacted with a creative robot generated more 
ideas, explored more themes, and were more original, than children who interacted with a non-
creative robot. Additionally, Gordon, Breazeal, and Engel, (2015) demonstrated that children 
became more curious, with curiosity viewed as an important creativity trait when interacting with 
a curious robot. The authors found that these children posed more questions and become avid 
explores, compared to children who interacted with a non-curious robot. Additional studies with 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
208 
the adult population also show how robots can exert influence on creative abilities in the older 
population (Kahn Jr, 2016). 
Our Contribution 
These studies convey evidence regarding the potential of social robots as tools for 
creativity stimulation in children. However, none of them used validated techniques for creativity 
development in the design of the behavior for the robot. Our research designed behaviors for the 
robot that were grounded on effective techniques for creativity established in the literature. 
Additionally, the physical shape of the robot used within our creativity interventions emerged 
from extensive co-design sessions with children thus making the shape, form, and feel of the 
robot adapted and accepted by children. Indeed, our robot enables free play as it can be carried 
around like a traditional toy. In contrast, existing studies used off-the-shelf robotic platforms that 
are outlet dependent and do not afford the free play dynamic. 
 Additionally, our research incorporates a robot in a storytelling context which is a 
familiar play activity in children’s lives. This aligns with the Product Design Framework in 
which a product is developed taking into account existing dynamics between users and their 
environment (Forlizzi, 2008; Netting, 1986). By using storytelling as the main intervention 
activity, we do not place an extra cognitive load on children, and they can be focused on 
interacting with the robot in the context of their stories. Using an activity that is already part of 
children’s lives to develop an intervention is an additional contribution of this work since most 
interventions for children resemble test-like formats. Previously developed interventions that 
include robots are were tailored to the capabilities/limitations if the robotic technology to 
develop the activity and not taking children’s activities as their main design drive. 
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
209 
 
Figure 41. Play sequence between a child and the YOLO robot. 
 
Goals, Hypothesis, and Research Question 
The goal of this study is to investigate the impact of using a robotic intervention for 
creativity in children’s verbal and figural creativity levels (see Figure 41). For that, we have 
designed five study conditions: i) an Individual experimental condition in which children interact 
with a robot that displays behaviors based on two creativity techniques (mirroring and 
contrasting, explained in Chapter 5); ii) an Enhanced experimental condition in which children 
interact with a robot that displays behaviors based on two creativity techniques plus social 
behaviors (social behaviors are described in Chapter 5); iii) a Group experimental condition in 
which groups of three children interact with a robot that displays behaviors based on two 
creativity techniques (in this condition the robot exhibited the same behaviors as in the individual 
condition); iv) a Comparison condition in which children interact with the same robot but the 
robot is turned off, thus no displaying any behaviors, and v) a Control condition in which 
children watch a short documentary movie about animals. 
Given the literature on group effects, we expect creativity levels of children to be higher 
in this condition. We also expect the experimental conditions to outperform comparison and 
control, as the robot was designed inspired in techniques from creativity research. We expect that 
the individual and enhanced conditions lead to an increase in children’s creative abilities 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
210 
compared to the comparison and control conditions. Finally, we expect that children in the 
comparison condition present higher creativity levels than children in the control. The research 
question for this study is the following: Can YOLO, a robot designed as a creativity intervention 
tool, stimulate creativity in children during s storytelling activity? 
Method 
Participants 
A total of 130 participants were involved in this study from 54 different schools. Four 
participants were involved in the pilot testing and four participants were excluded. The reasons 
for exclusion concerned three participants that were unable either to fill in the questionnaires of 
performing the intervention activity, and one participant was excluded due to special needs. 
Therefore, the main analysis consisted of 122 participants. Details about the sample 
demographics can be found in Table 16 and include children’s gender, age, number of siblings, 
nationality, and ethnicity. Despite having children from different nationalities and ethnicities, all 
children involved in the study were proficient in written and spoken Portuguese according to 
their developmental stage. This study was performed in school summer camps in the region of 
Lisbon. 
We applied the Pictorial Personality Traits Questionnaire for Children at pre-test, the 
Intrinsic Motivation Index (dimensions Interest/Enjoyment and Perceived effort/Usefulness) at 
post-test, and two questions that evaluated the researcher’s warmth and competence at post-test. 
Results from these controlled factors are detailed in Table 16. The analysis showed no significant 
differences between groups. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
211 
Table 16. Sample demographics of eligible participants as a function of conditions. 
Demographics 
  
 
Total  
(N = 122) 
 
Conditions 
 
Tests 
Control  
(N = 20) 
Comparison  
(N = 25) 
Individual  
(N = 24) 
Enhanced 
(N = 24) 
Group  
(N = 29) 
Gender (N) 
50F, 72M 
8F, 12M 
12F, 13M 
6F, 18M 
10F, 14M 
14F, 15M 
!2(4, N = 122) =3.69, p = .449  
Age (M ± 
± SD; Min-Max) 
8.05 ± 0.89; 
6-10 
8.15 ± 0.99; 
7-10 
7.80 ± 0.76; 
6-9 
8.25 ± 0.85; 
7-9 
7.79± 0.98; 
6-10 
8.24 ± 0.83; 
7-10 
F(4, 122) = 1.74, p = .145 
Sibling (M, SD; 
Min-Max) 
0.86, 0.83; 
0-4 
0.75 ± 0.72; 
0-3 
1.12 ± 1.13; 
0-4 
0.96 ± 0.81; 
0-3 
0.83 ± 0.57; 
0-2 
0.66 ± 0.77; 
0-3 
F(4, 122) = 1.254, p = .292 
Nationality (N) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
!2(16, N = 122) =16.10, p = 
.446 
   Portuguese 
117 
20 
23 
23 
22 
29 
 
   Swiss 
1 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
 
   Brazilian 
1 
0 
0 
0 
1 
0 
 
   Italian 
1 
0 
1 
0 
0 
0 
 
Romanian 
1 
0 
1 
0 
0 
0 
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
212 
Ethnicity (N) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
!2(8, N = 122) =7.54, p = .480  
   Caucasian 
115 
19 
24 
22 
22 
28 
 
   Indian 
3 
1 
1 
0 
1 
0 
 
   African 
3 
0 
0 
2 
0 
1 
 
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
213 
Measures 
 
We applied two different measures to evaluate creativity in children: CREA (Corbalán et 
al., 2003) and TCT-DP (Jellen, & Urban, 1986). Additionally, we interpreted the time that 
children spent on the task as an indicator of creativity exploration. Time was measured in 
minutes thought the audio recordings f children. We also applied the Pictorial Personality Traits 
Questionnaire for Children (PPTQ-C; Maćkiewicz, & Cieciuch, 2016), the Intrinsic Motivation 
Index, (IMI; McAuley, Duncan, & Tammen, 1989), and the Researcher Warmth and 
Competence. We describe each of these measures below. 
CREA is a test was used to measure verbal creative intelligence using a cognitive 
evaluation of an individual’s creativity by considering questions generation (Corbalán Berná, et 
al., 2003). As our main intervention is verbal, i.e., children verbally create a story with a robot, 
CREA was the fittest test to use in our study. CREA consists of three illustrated pages (Forms A, 
B, and C) from which the subjects are asked to generate as many questions as he/she can think of 
that are related with the drawings. Two of these drawings (Forms A and C) can be applied in 
young children and were used in the scope of this study, Form A was applied at pre-test level and 
Form C at the post-test level. The questions asked by children were audio-recorded, transcribed, 
and evaluated taking into account CREA’s manual for verbal creativity measurement and a 
single score is attributed at the end. Therefore, each question received 1 point per cognitive 
scheme. For example, the question “Is this a rabbit?” would receive one point, whereas the 
question “Is this a rabbit or a dog?” would receive two points, and so on. Generally, all questions 
were considered correct including questions that are similar, such as “What age are they?” and 
“When were they born”? were included, as well as questions that represent distance “Is this 
related with the History of Portugal?”, or questions that are more general “What happened 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
214 
here?”. Questions were excluded if they were repeated o if the questions did not contain 
formulation (e.g., “What?”). The single score computed for creativity verbal intelligence 
consisted of the sum of scores that followed a formula. In this formula, the scores for each 
question were summed and the scores of excluded questions were subtracted. We explored the 
presence of extreme values at baseline (pre-test values of CREA). Results showed five extreme 
values with higher levels of creativity. We transformed data using logarithmic transformation 
(LOG10+1) to deal with negative numbers. With this logarithmic transformation, no extreme 
values were found, and data is normally distributed at pre- and post-tests, p > .05 (Field, 2009). 
TCT-DP is a test that measures the graphic-figural creative potential of children. For this 
study, we used TCT-DP Form A at the post-test level. No pre-test was applied since the 
intervention had a verbal content superior to the graphic-figural content. TCT-DP was applied 
and analyzed similarly to what was described in Chapter 4 (see Appendix A for the instructions 
used). 
The Pictorial Personality Traits Questionnaire for Children (called Personality Test from 
now on for simplicity; Maćkiewicz, & Cieciuch, 2016) measures the creativity traits of young 
children. The main idea of this instrument is that the personality traits are indicated by pictures 
that represent behaviors. The character presented in each picture was designed to be unisex and 
is performing different actions (e.g., cleaning the room, playing in school). Children are 
presented with 14 questions and have to in a 3-point type-Likert scale that is accompanied by an 
image to facilitate their understanding. Their goal is to choose the behavior that they perform 
more. In case none of the images represent their behavior, they can choose the answer "it 
depends". This measure was translated into Portuguese by the researchers due to the inexistence 
of the questionnaire validation for the Portuguese population. However, the authors of this 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
215 
questionnaire were contacted, and the full questionnaire was shared with us. We applied this 
questionnaire at the pre-test level. 
The intrinsic motivation of children to perform the storytelling task was measured using 
the Intrinsic Motivation Inventory (IMI; McAuley, Duncan, & Tammen, 1989). This inventory is 
a multidimensional measurement intended to assess participants’ subjective experiences related 
to a target activity. The instrument assesses participants’ intrinsic motivation across the 6 
subscales of (1) interest/enjoyment, (2) perceived competence, (3) effort, (4) value/usefulness, 
(5) felt pressure and tension, (6) and perceived choice, thus yielding six subscale scores. For this 
study, the subscales of Interest-Enjoyment and Effort-Usefulness were chosen. Children used a 
5-point type-Likert scale in the form of a Smilyometer to answer this questionnaire by asking 
children to tick one face (or emoji) (Read, 2008). The key attributes of the Smilyometer are that 
it is easy to complete, quick to complete, requires limited reading ability, and requires no 
writing. This measure was applied in the post-test. 
Evaluation of the researcher was performed by asking children to answer two questions 
referring to the researcher’s warmth and competence during the intervention task. We included 
questions targeting the warmth and competence of the researcher that performed the intervention 
(R1) as these are two fundamental dimensions of social perception defined by the Stereotype 
Content Model (Cuddy, Fiske, & Glick, 2008; Fiske, Cuddy, Glick, & Xu, 2002). The two 
questions are the following: “How nice was the researcher with you?” (warmth item) and “How 
well did the researcher explain the activity to you?” (competence item). Children were invited to 
answer these questions using a 5-point type-Likert scale in the form of a Smilyometer (Read, 
2008). To ensure additional anonymity in answering these questions, a secret box was provided 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
216 
to the participant who placed their answer in the box. This measure was at a posttest stage and 
signaled the closure of the activity. 
Additionally, we measured the time that children were engaged in the storytelling by 
analyzing each audio recording of the session. Time is an important variable in creativity 
findings and time pressure is associated with creativity increase under certain and very specific 
conditions, such as a deadline to “get a job done”. Therefore, time constraints can be useful for 
tasks that have a closed end-goal but also come with drawbacks, such as increased anxiety levels 
(Amabile, Hadley, & Kramer, 2002; Amabile, Mueller, Simpson, Hadley, Kramer, & Fleming, 
2002). Given the playful nature of our intervention related with open-ended stories of children, 
we opted to not limit children’s storytelling in terms of time, but rather to analyze time as a 
measure of exploration behaviors, which are related to creativity (Cecil, Gray, Thornburg, & 
ISPA, 1985). Therefore, we measure the total duration of the narrative of storytelling by 
considering the time difference between the first and the last idea generated for the story. 
Additionally, latency response time was also measured by analyzing the audio recordings of 
children. Latency time was defined as the time lapse between the presentation of the stimuli to 
the children (YOLO robot) and the beginning of the generation of the first idea for the story. 
Latency response is associated with the generation of new ideas (Benedek, Jauk, Fink, 
Koschutnig, Reishofer, Ebner, & Neubauer, 2014) and specifically to divergent thinking 
processes (Acar, & Runco, 2017). Latency time was thus measured from the stimulus onset 
(presentation of YOLO robot to the children) until the first idea related to the story was 
generated (see Figure 45). 
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
217 
 
Figure 42. Time measurements included Latency and Exploration time. 
 
Procedure 
Data collection will include the following stages: recruitment of summer camps, 
recruitment of children participants, perform study sessions (including pretest, treatment, 
posttest), and debriefing. We described these stages in detail below. Additionally, this study 
followed the ethical and professional standards of the code of conduct of research in Portugal, 
which requires a commitment to protect the fundamental right to privacy and personal data 
protection, being subject to the requirements of the General Data Protection Regulation and 
associated legislation. No monetary or symbolic reward is provided to children who participated 
in this study. However, children benefited from the study by being exposed to cutting-edge 
robotic technology. 
Recruitment of summer camps. Summer camps in the region of Lisbon, Portugal, were 
contacted via email. Upon gathering which summer camps are interested in being involved in the 
study, a visit to the summer camp was performed to assure that the requirements for the study are 
met (e.g., having access to a private classroom for the study). During this first visit, the study 
was be presented to the summer camp staff which consisted of teachers and additional relevant 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
218 
personnel. A presentation session with parents was held in some cases to clarify potential doubts 
depending on the summer camp requests. 
Recruitment of participants. Since the participants are children, the written consent of 
legal guardians was required as well as children’s verbal assent to engage in the study at the time 
of the intervention session. The recruitment process was held jointly with summer camps. A 
consent form was delivered to the summer camps that have declared interested in being involved 
in the study. The consent form was then delivered to the legal guardians of children through 
summer camps and only children whose informed consent was returned and signed were 
included in the study. This consent form contained: a summary about the study including 
estimated time per session and the activities that will be performed, an explanation about the 
voluntary nature of participation detailing the need for children’s verbal assent at the time of the 
session, an explanation about how data will be collected, treated and stored, and that collected 
data is anonymized and kept private. The main goal of the study was not explicit in the consent 
form to ensure internal validity. However, a detailed debriefing was provided to children at the 
end of the study session. Email contact of the researchers was provided in the consent form to 
enable the legal guardians the possibility of contacting the researcher for clarifying additional 
questions.  
Intervention. The study was be performed in a reserved room ensuring a controlled 
environment with no interruptions. Three researchers (named R1 and R2, for simplicity) with 
psychology training were responsible for conducting the study. One of the researchers was 
responsible for administering the intervention (R1) and two different researchers delivered the 
pre and posttests measures (R2 and R3). R2 and R3 alternated their presence in the study. They 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
219 
had a similar psychology background and equivalent experience in working with children. This 
requirement was performed to control for possible experimenter bias. 
Before the beginning of the study, R1 coordinated with the summer camp teachers to 
select one child at the time to perform the session. The child was briefed about the general 
activities to be performed and gave a verbal assent in participating. It was emphasized that there 
were no right or wrong answers for any question, and the child was encouraged to ask questions 
in case some clarification was needed. It was emphasized that there are no consequences in case 
the child refused to participate. The study was composed of three moments with an estimated 
total duration of 30-45 min in total: 
The pretest took between 10-15min and R2/R3 delivered the following questionnaires: 
demographic information (e.g., age, number of siblings); Pictorial Personality Traits 
Questionnaire for Children (Maćkiewicz, & Cieciuch, 2016) translated to Portuguese by the 
researchers; measure for verbal creativity CREA Form A (Corbalán Berná et al., 2003). 
Activity had no time limit and took place on the floor of the room to replicate a natural 
setting where children play with their toys. R1 explained the activity to the child according to the 
allocated condition: 
Experimental and comparison conditions: It was explained to the participant that he/she 
will play and create a story of their choice using the YOLO robot as a character. The instructions 
are delivered by R1 and the participant seated on the floor next to each other to set an informal 
environment. When the activity started, R1 remained nearby but with minimum interventions. 
This task had no time-limit and ends when the participant says that the story has come to an end. 
Pilot testing revealed that story creation takes between 2-10min. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
220 
Control condition: Children watched a short documentary movie about animals. Original 
documentary translated to Portuguese: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ls7WOGcE9Oo. The 
selected part of the documentary starts at 44:45min until 51:45min, having the same medium 
time of treatment conditions. This part was chosen as it contained the least emotionally arousing 
part while still containing enough story content to engage children. At the end of the session, 
children in this group were given equal opportunity to be exposed to the robot by being invited to 
play with it. 
The post-test took between 10-15min and R2/R3 administered the following 
questionnaires: Graphic-figural creativity was measured using the TCT-DP Form A (Jellen, & 
Urban, 1986); verbal creativity was measured using the CREA Form C (Corbalán Berná, et al. 
2003); Intrinsic Motivation Inventory (IMI; Dimensions Interest-enjoyment and Effort-
usefulness, McAuley, Duncan, & Tammen, 1989); and evaluation of R1 warmth and competence 
levels (Cuddy, Fiske, & Glick, 2008; Fiske, Cuddy, Glick, & Xu, 2002). 
The debriefing was made to the child directly, and the way the information was delivered 
was adapted to the child’s level of language and cognition. This meant that researchers were 
available to answer any questions that the child might have about the study and the procedures in 
an understandable way. In case children did not ask direct questions at the end of the study, the 
researcher voluntarily debriefed children by explaining that the goal of this study was to 
investigate how children play with toys and how these can affect their creativity (debriefing for 
the experimental condition). In the case of the control condition, it was explained that we 
investigated the impact of watching a short documentary movie on children’s creativity. 
Additionally, summer camps involved in this study will have access to the study results.  
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
221 
Results 
Group Comparison on Individual Differences (Personality), Evaluation of Researcher 
(warmth and competence) and Motivation for the Task (Intrinsic Motivation) 
 
We started by analyzing differences between groups regarding personality differences, 
the motivation for the task, and how children evaluated the researcher in terms of warmth and 
competence (see Table 17). Results have shown that there were no significant differences across 
conditions in terms of the personality traits Agreeableness, F(4, 122) = 2.32, p = .061, Openness 
to experience, F(4, 122) = 0.71, p = .585, Neuroticism, F(4, 122) = 0.80, p = .525, 
Consciousness, F(4, 122) = 0.07, p = .992, and Extraversion, F(4, 122) = 1.14, p = .342. 
Additionally, we can see that the overall sample scored high on Agreeableness (M = 2.76, SD = 
0.39) and the lowest trait was Neuroticism (M = 1.37, SD = 0.41). Similarly, results showed no 
differences between conditions on the level of intrinsic motivation of children to perform the 
task. This can be seen in as the dimensions of Interest-Enjoyment, F(4, 122) = 1.51, p = .205,  
and Effort-Usefulness, F(4, 122) = 2.22, p = .071 did not differ between conditions. 
Additionally, children reported to have greatly enjoyed the task (M = 4.57, SD = 0.70) and have 
placed effort in it (M = 4.50, SD = 0.66). In terms of the researcher evaluation, there were also no 
differences across condition on the perceived researcher warmth, F(4, 97) = 1.40, p = .240, and 
competence, F(4, 97) = .17, p = .953, with these levels being rated high (M = 4.96, SD = 0.20; M 
= 4.93, SD = 0.20, for warmth and competence, respectively. 
 
 
 
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
222 
Table 17. Comparison of conditions as a function of children’s intrinsic motivation, personality, 
and evaluation of researcher (warmth and competence). 
 
 
  
  
Variables 
 
Total  
 
 
Conditions 
 
 
 
Tests 
Control  
Comparison  Individual  
Enhanced  Group  
M ± 
SD 
M ± SD 
M ± SD 
M ± SD 
M ± SD 
M ± SD 
Intrinsic 
Motivation 
(range 1-5) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Interest-
enjoyment  
4.57 ± 
0.70 
4.55 
±0.79 
4.48 ± 0.59 
4.44 ± 0.90 
4.47 ± 
0.79 
4.83 ± 
0.31 
F(4, 122) = 1.51, 
p = .205 
Perceived 
effort-
usefulness 
 
4.50 ± 
0.66 
4.20 ± 
0.83  
4.57 ±0.43 
4.51 ± 0.75 
4.38 ± 
0.83 
4.72 ± 
0.36 
F(4, 122) = 2.22, 
p = .071 
Personality 
(range 1-3) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Agreeableness 2.76 ± 
0.39 
2.88 ± 
0.25 
2.87 ± 0.25 
2.58 ± 0.55 
2.75 ± 
0.38 
2.74 ± 
0.38 
F(4, 122) = 2.32, 
p = .061 
Openness to 
experience  
2.61 ± 
0.39 
2.63 ± 
0.39 
2.68 ± 0.30 
2.54 ± 0.44 
2.67 ± 
0.34 
2.55 ± 
0.46 
F(4, 122) = 0.71, 
p = .585 
Neuroticism  
1.37 ± 
0.41 
1.32 ± 
0.48 
1.39 ± 0.44 
1.43 ± 0.44 
1.46 ± 
0.39 
1.29 ± 
0.32 
F(4, 122) = 0.80, 
p = .525 
Consciousness 2.58 
±0.48 
2.57 ± 
0.47 
2.61 ± 0.42 
2.55 ± 0.54 
2.57 ± 
0.57 
2.60 ± 
0.45 
F(4, 122) = 0.07, 
p = .992 
Extraversion 
2.54 ± 
0.46 
2.67, 
0.43 
2.61 ± 0.56 
2.49 ± 0.39 
2.40 ± 
0.45 
2.54 ± 
0.44 
F(4, 122) = 1.14, 
p = .342 
Evaluation of 
Researchers 
(range 1-5) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Warmth 
4.96 ±, 
0.20 
4.90 ±, 
0.31 
5.00 ± 0.0 
4.92 ± 0.28 
5.00 ± 0.0 
5.00 ± 
0.0 
F(4, 97) = 1.40, p 
= .240 
Competence 
4.93 ±, 
0.20 
4.90 ±, 
0.45 
4.92 ± 0.29 
4.92 ± 0.28 
4.95 ± 
0.23 
4.96 ± 
0.19 
F(4, 97) = .17, p = 
.953 
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
223 
Table 18. Zero-order correlations between creativity outcomes (verbal and figural) with 
children’s baseline levels of verbal creativity, intrinsic motivation (interest-enjoyment and 
perceived effort-usefulness) and personality (openness to experience, neuroticism, extraversion, 
conscientiousness, and agreeableness).   
 
 
Creativity outcomes 
Baseline verbal creativity measures 
& motivation 
Verbal 
Figural 
global 
Figural: 
Innovativeness 
Figural: 
Adaptiveness 
Baseline Verbal creativity  
.60** 
.18 
.14 
.17 
Interest/enjoyment  
.09 
.06 
-.01 
.20* 
Perceived effort-usefulness 
.02 
-.05 
-.09 
.09 
Openness to experience 
-.03 
.08 
.07 
.04 
Neuroticism 
.01 
-.04 
.05 
-.01 
Extraversion 
.04 
.11 
.08 
.11 
Conscientiousness 
-.05 
-.12 
-.17 
.07 
Agreeableness 
-.06 
-.08 
-.10 
.01 
Note. * p < .05; ** p < .001      
 
We analyzed the correlations between the creativity outcomes measured with CREA and 
TCT-DP (verbal and figural-graphic creativity) with children’s baseline levels for the creativity 
tests, their personality traits, and intrinsic motivation (see Table 18). Results showed a positive 
and moderate correlation between the verbal creativity at baseline and at the post-test level, r = 
.60, p < .001. We also found a correlation although with a lower value, between the dimension of 
Interest-Enjoyment of the IMI and the Adaptiveness dimension of TCT-DP, r = .20, p < .05. 
Effects of Conditions on Figural Creativity 
We started by analyzing the effect of the Group conditions on the figural creativity of 
children. To compare the five conditions (Control, Comparison, Individual, Enhanced, and 
Group) on figural creativity (TCT-DP global, and the two dimensions of adaptiveness and 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
224 
innovation) using CREA pre-test as a covariate, analyses of covariance (ANCOVAs) were 
conducted. Results for the global creativity, F(4,112) = .41, p = .80, ηp2 = .01, and for each 
dimension, i.e., adaptiveness, F(4,112) = .41, p = .80, ηp2 = .01, and innovativeness, F(4,112) = 
.46, p = .77, ηp2 = .02, did not present significant results. 
Additionally, in the same ANCOVAs, we performed two planned contrasts of interest. 
The first planned contrast compared the effect of the four conditions that used a robot 
(Comparison, Individual, Enhanced, and Group) to the control condition. However, the analyses 
also revealed no significant result, F(1, 112) = 1.33, p = .25, ηp2 = .01. The second planned 
contrast compared the effect of the three conditions that used the no static version of the robot 
(Individual, Enhanced, and Group) to the control condition, but the results were also non-
significant, F(1, 112) = 1.41, p = .24, ηp2 = .01. 
Effect of Conditions on Verbal Creativity 
To compare the five conditions (Control, Comparison, Individual, Enhanced, and Group) 
on verbal creativity (CREA), a one-way ANOVA was conducted using a change score between 
the post- and the pre-tests scores (higher scores correspond to higher increase in verbal creativity 
from baseline). The overall results were not significant, F(4, 111), p = .08, ηp2 = .07. However, the 
comparison between each level revealed that verbal creativity increased more in the Group (∆M 
= 6.56; ∆SE = 1.22) compared to the Enhanced (∆M = 1.50 ; ∆SE = 1.31, p = .006) and the 
Comparison conditions (∆M = 2.96; ∆SE = 1.30, p = .45). No significant differences were found 
between the Individual (∆M = 4.17; ∆SE = 1.32, and the Control conditions (∆M = 3.90; ∆SE = 
1.42), p > .05 (see Figure 43). 
 
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
225 
 
Figure 43. Increase in verbal creativity (CREA) from pre to post-test, *p < .05. 
 
Effects of Conditions on Exploration and Latency Times 
The effect of the conditions on the creativity process of story creation while children 
were interacting with the robot were additionally tested by considering the time spent creating 
the story; and the latency (i.e., the amount of delay it took to create the first idea for the story), 
both measured in minutes. For these analyses we did not consider the Control condition, 
since these processes could not be analyzed in a condition where children were only watching a 
movie. Therefore, to compare the four conditions (Comparison, Individual, Enhanced, and 
Group) on exploration using CREA pre-test as a covariate, two ANCOVAs were conducted.  
Results for the time children spent creating the story showed an effect of the condition, 
F(3, 91) = 29.03, p < .001, ηp2 = .49, indicating that the children spend more time creating the 
story in the Group, (M = 8.92, SE = .43), than in the Enhanced (M = 4.74, SE = .49, p < .001), 
Individual (M = 4.59, SE = .51, p < .001), and Comparison conditions (M = 2.62, SE = 48, p < 
.001). Results also indicated that in the Comparison children spend the lowest time creating the  
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
226 
 
Figure 44. Duration of story creation as a function of conditions in which children played with 
the robot. *p < .05, **p < .001. 
 
story compared to the Individual and the Enhanced conditions, p = .006 and p = .002, 
respectively. No significant differences were found between the Individual and the Enhanced 
conditions, p > .05 (see Figure 44). 
The ANCOVA results for the latency time also showed an effect of the condition, F(3, 
91) = 13.73, p < .001, ηp2 = .31, indicating that the highest latency time occurred in the Group, (M 
= 2.25, SE = .15), compared to the Enhanced (M = 1.74, SE = .15, p = .018), Individual (M = 
1.63, SE = .16, p = .006), and Comparison (M = .91, SE = 15, p < .001). In addition, the results 
indicated that latency time in the Comparison condition was the lowest compared to the 
Individual and the Enhanced conditions, p = .001 and p < .001, respectively. No significant 
differences were found between the Individual and the Enhanced conditions, p > .05 (see Figure 
45). 
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
227 
 
Figure 45. Latency time to generate ideas as a function of conditions in which children played 
with the robot *p < .05, **p < .001. 
 
Discussion 
This study aimed at providing evidence for the use of a robot in creativity interventions 
with children for creativity fostering. This robot was co-designed with children and its behaviors 
were grounded in literature research in creativity. Additionally, the context of the intervention 
was a playful task of storytelling in which children used the robot as a character for their stories. 
We evaluated creativity increase in terms of verbal and figural creativity stimulation. Our results 
showed that the Group condition outperformed the Individual conditions, including the 
Experimental, Comparison, and Control conditions. Particularly, children’s creativity increased 
comparing the Group condition with the Individual condition, in which the robot was generating 
the same types of behaviors. This result seems to show that group effects play an important role 
in creativity stimulation.  
Additionally, we have measured how long children were engaged in the storytelling task 
and results showed that children are engaged for a longer period in the Group condition 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
228 
compared to the other conditions. Additionally, results also showed that children have a 
significantly lower exploration time in the Control condition, which means they are engaged in 
creativity processes of storytelling for significantly lower periods of time. An interesting result is 
the fact that children in the Control condition had a lower latency time and in the Group 
condition they had a higher latency time. Therefore, while children took more time to generate 
ideas for the story in a group context, they then seem to stay engaged in the task for longer 
periods. Similarly, to the previous result group effects seem to be strong in creativity in the 
context of an open-ended task. We hypothesize that children are discussing more between until 
reaching an agreement in the Group condition, therefore also taking more time for the story 
creation. Taken together, these confirm our hypothesis and seem to be in line with previous work 
on adult group creativity which shows that while it is possible for one person to take multiple 
perspectives on a problem or task, a wider range of perspectives is more likely when several 
people are brought together and approach an issue or problem from different angles or 
backgrounds (Paulus, & Nijstad, 2003). 
Research on group creativity has also shown that the group dynamics influence creativity 
processes, especially in groups that hold different perspectives over a problem or situation. 
Indeed, products generated in these groups are more original (Van Dyne, & Saavedra, 1996), 
innovative (De Dreu, & West, 2001), complex (Gruenfeld, 1995), and with higher value 
(Nemeth, Brown, & Rogers, 2001). Additionally, the cognitive mechanisms by which groups 
exchange ideas to generate decisions or products, can be considered to require creative 
processes. In our case, to create a cohesive story children had to debate ideas with each other 
until a consensus was reached. Taking into account this literature and the fact that we have 
collected audio recordings of children creating a story for all the conditions, new hypothesis can 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
229 
be generated a posteri. Namely, we hypothesize that the creative process of children differs 
across conditions. This hypothesis can yield additional understandings about interventions for 
creativity using robots and the group dynamics behind them. Therefore, it would be interesting to 
study this hypothesis as future work; however, it is currently outside the objectives of this 
thesis24. 
Limitations 
This study contains limitations that we would like to acknowledge. Firstly, to study the 
effects of a creativity intervention we used a test that evaluated creativity potential traits. 
Although the results are informative and important, they do not account for influences in 
creativity states in children. Creativity is reported to changes over the lifespan demonstrating that 
creative states are not stable, instead they can have fluctuations (Palmiero, Di Giacomo, & 
Passafiume, 2014). Despite creativity being dependent on individual traits, such as personality 
(Puryear, Kettler, & Rinn, 2017) and motivation (Conti, Collins, & Picariello, 2001), it should 
also be looked at from a state perspective, which is not present in the study. Additionally, CREA, 
was our main creativity measure since it evaluates verbal creativity mapped to the verbal nature 
of the task. As mentioned before, CREA, provides a sum score for creativity outcomes. 
However, this score has no maximum or minimum value, which can introduce problematic 
unbalances in when it comes to analyzing the results of this test.  
Authors in the field of creativity have pointed out several limitations for the existing 
creativity tests. Firstly, creativity is a multifaced concept and a domain-dependent construct; 
therefore, instruments for measuring creativity may vary as a function of the domain-components 
 
24 We collaborated with an animation artist to bring one of the stories created by children come to live. This story is 
called “The Medal” and was created in the context of the individual condition: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yJwv-IatUcw&feature=youtu.be 
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
230 
being stimulated or evaluated (Barbot, Besançon, & Lubart, 2011). Secondly, there are a varying 
number of definitions for what creativity means, which suggests that creativity measures vary 
depending on which concept of creativity was used on the scale validation (Houtz, & Krug, 
1995). As a consequence, most of the knowledge about creativity is based on different 
assumptions of what creativity is, introducing a variability bias that hinders understanding about 
intervention, which is the case of our study. Thirdly and most importantly for the understanding 
of our results, is the fact that there are very few data evidencing the stability, factor complexity 
and predictive validity of creativity measures. This leads many authors in the field of creativity 
to develop new scales and lament the failure of existing measurement methods (Barbot, 
Besançon, & Lubart, 2011; Haensly Torrance, 1990; Houtz, & Krug, 1995). Therefore, analyzing 
the creative process of children could provide new results about the understanding of the effects 
of the different interventions. This could be achieved by relying on a traditional scoring system 
for the cognitive dimensions of creativity comprised of Fluency (number of ideas generated), 
Flexibility (number of ideas that belong to a different category), Elaboration (number of details 
introduced), and Originality (rarity of ideas) (Guilford, 1967; Sternberg, 2005; Torrance, 1966). 
Highlights 
• Experimental testing of the effects of a novel intervention tool, a social robot, in 
creativity training. 
• Analysis of group versus individual effects on creativity stimulation with robots. 
Pre-registration of this research in the Open Science Framework, ensuring a planned 
research plan and data analysis, according to pre-defined hypothesis 
 
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
231 
Chapter 7. General discussion 
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
232 
This thesis sheds light on the effects of a creativity intervention that uses an autonomous 
robot to stimulate creativity during the interaction with children in the context of free play. This 
work includes a literature a review of interventions for creativity, studies to investigate the 
potentials of robotic technology in creativity stimulation, and on the development of a fully 
autonomous robot. The main contributions of this thesis are represented in Figure 46. 
This work came from the need to nurture creativity in children given its current 
importance in society. As previously mentioned, Bloom’s Taxonomy was upgraded and now 
includes creativity as the most complex of the cognitive processes (Hanna, 2007). The New 
Skills Agenda for Europe delivered by the European Commission considered creativity as one of 
the Key Competences for Lifelong Learning (Cachia, Ferrari, Ala-Mutka, & Punie, 2010; 
European Comission, 2006;), and UNESCO’s Sustainable Developmental Goals highlighted the 
importance of creativity and innovation to develop societies and economies (UNESCO, 2017). 
Therefore, this work has the potential to contribute to the field of creativity research, design, and 
HRI.  
In terms of psychology, and specifically focusing on the creativity research field, this 
work contributed with an extensive literature review spanning 68 years of research on creativity 
programs for children. During the systematic review of the literature, there was a need identified 
during this thesis to code the existing programs. With the fuzziness of literature in the field of 
creativity, in which many concepts are being used under different terms lacking a general 
agreement not only on the concept of “creativity” but also on its various related concepts (Runco, 
Nemiro, & Walberg, 1998; Sternberg, 1999), we have developed a coding scheme for coding 
creativity interventions. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
233 
 
Figure 46. Main contributions of this thesis organized by chapters. 
 
This coding scheme was extensively based on previous literature (Scott, Leritz, & Mumford, 
2004a) and included different levels of analysis for which a creativity intervention can be 
classified for (see Chapter 3 for more details).  
Also, we demonstrated that existing activities performed in schools using robots, such as 
coding and designing robots, have the potential to increase creativity (see Chapter 4). This 
introduces a turning point for classroom activities, as not only children learn new concepts of 
geometry, math, physics during STEM education, as their creativity gets stimulated at the same 
time as a positive side-effect. Up to now, school systems have been looked at conservatively 
when it comes to stimulating creativity, being the main reasons related with homework overload 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
234 
and the passive role of children while learning (Gardner & Gardner, 2008; Nash, 1974; Runco, 
Acar, & Cayirdag, 2017; Runco & Cayirdag, 2006; Torrance, 1968). Given that creativity has 
been considering one of the most important qualities to have (Bloom, 1956, Hanna, 2007) this 
constitutes an important result as schools should incorporate similar activities to develop 
creativity in children. 
Within this work, we also demonstrated the design and fabrication of our own robot for 
creativity. The motivation behind building a robot relates to the fact that existing robots 
presented several limitations in the context of a creativity intervention for children. For example, 
existing robots are usually heavy, hard to manipulate, and children are cautious when it comes to 
the interaction with fear of damaging it. On top of this, existing robots are outlet dependent, 
which constrains children in being seated at the table or confined to a place during an interaction. 
Overall, our main contribution was the development of a robot whose interaction with children 
enables creativity development as this robot was designed according to creativity research 
principles. Additionally, this robot enables free play, physical touch, and unrestricted movements 
through space. An additional and equally important contribution was the fact that this robot was 
co-designed with children, given them the possibility of expressing their wishes, desires, and 
wants for a technology that is meant to be used by them. Through the interaction with children, 
we envisioned this robot as a catalyzer of their creative thought. During the process of design 
and fabrication of this robot, new knowledge was acquired. Concepts from related fields of 
research, such as mechanical engineering, computer science, and robotics were learned to enable 
us to build this robotic artifact.  
This research demonstrates how social robots can become tools for psychological 
interventions. Social robots have already been used as an intervention tool or a stimulus in 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
235 
interventions (Cangelosi, & Schlesinger, 2018). We have leveraged on robot’s controllability, 
namely the possibility to code any behavior into a robot, making it a tool in creativity 
interventions. We conducted an intervention task that can facilitate creative processes due to its 
open-ended nature (storytelling) but also due to the familiarity of children with telling stories, 
not imposing an extra cognitive load on children during the intervention (see Chapter 6). This 
approach goes in line with the Product Design Framework in which a product is developed 
taking into account existing dynamics between users and their context and environment (Netting, 
1986; Forlizzi2008). Having robots as tools also introduces new benefits for the field of 
psychology as they easy the replication process of studies. Researchers can share the code of 
their robots with other researchers to reproduce the same behaviors for the robot in a different 
lab. We believe that this will enable transparent research paradigms and contribute to the 
advancement and innovation in the field (Ishiyama, 2014). 
Reflections for Future Studies in Child-Robot Interaction for Creativity 
We would like to take a chance to share deeper reflections that emerged from findings 
that this thesis originated and how they relate to the interdisciplinary nature of this research. Our 
main goal with this work was to use robots as creativity interventions with children whose 
purpose was to stimulate their creative abilities. To achieve this, we build on a combination of 
three main research fields: Psychology, Design Research, and HRI. We started by performing a 
literature review that provided a deeper understanding of the various training programs for 
creativity. While this literature review was eliciting in many aspects of creativity research, it also 
proved to be limited in its essence. The main limitation we found was that the term “creativity” is 
not well defined in the literature. We found not many different and sometimes opposing views of 
the term “creativity”, but we also found that the different skills that can be developed under 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
236 
creativity training lack consensus. We, therefore, had difficulty in categorizing the different 
creativity skills that training programs were promoting and to choose what creativity skills we 
could promote in children within our research. To face this, we developed a coding scheme that 
we hope can initiate further consensus on this field and have chosen to stimulate divergent and 
convergent thinking skills. However, this decision still has its problems as, for example, it was 
difficult to determine when divergent thinking turns into convergent thinking. Therefore, we 
acknowledge that more work is needed to define creativity concepts. 
An additional limitation that we have found related to measuring creativity. While several 
tests that measure creativity traits and potentials, there is a need to develop measures that account 
for analyzing creativity states. What this means is that while pre- and post-test measures are 
available to measure impacts/effects on creativity, there is a lack of measures that account for 
analyzing the creativity process, which is an extremely rich part of creativity research. Although 
some coding schemes can be available in the literature, these are not sustained by studies that can 
inform benchmarks on the creative process. This means that although we can quantify the 
creative process, we are unable to tell if the resulting creativity score corresponds to high/low 
creativity. Furthermore, there is no benchmark for different demographics, which prevents 
understand about the creative process across different populations such as children vs adults. 
There is thus a need to deepen the research in creativity processes.  
Taken together, this had several implications for our work. Firstly, we found it difficult to 
understand how to design a robot for creativity. While we did our best to motivate our design 
decisions, there is a corresponding uncertainty since concepts in creativity are poorly defined and 
confusing at times. We envision that further studies with the YOLO robot in which the behavior 
of the robot is programmed with different degrees of creativity interventions can lead to a more 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
237 
accurate understanding of the effects of the interaction in children’s creativity levels and 
dimensions. 
Secondly, we would like to acknowledge that previous work on creativity and robots is 
scarce, which resulted in very few works that could inform our own. Despite this, we were still 
able to build an autonomous robot that can influence the creativity of children up to a certain 
level. This research-case furthers the usage of social robots as it presents a groundbreaking 
deployment of a robot for creativity interventions, which has never been done before. This sets 
new goals for the field of HRI where robots can be used to improve human skills and empower 
their lives, rather than just performing repetitive tasks and help-behaviors. YOLO physical look 
(or embodiment) is non-humanoid, showing that we do not necessarily need robots that resemble 
the human body to create engaging interactions that have effects on creativity. Instead, 
minimalistic interactions with abstract robots such as YOLO can be efficient in affecting human 
behavior. This also sets a different vision for the field of robots that goes beyond the traditional 
sci-fi looking robots to enter more creative robot’s designs. Additionally, the fact that robots 
impacted the creativity of children also demonstrates (shows in the studies of Chapters 4 and 6) 
demonstrates that psychology can benefit from an additional research tool – the robots 
themselves.  
Thirdly, During the process of designing YOLO, as considering this was a UCD process 
in which children were active participants in each design stage, we were able to contribute to 
several contributions to the field of design research. A major contribution was the abstraction in 
our design process of YOLO to the UCD process of any social robot. We achieved this by 
generalizing the different stages of the Double Diamond-Design Process Model that we have 
used with children, to the design of any robot. More on this can be seen in Figure 21. We 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
238 
intended to provide to any researcher with a starting point for designing a robot that is inclusive 
of the end-users throughout the entire design process. While users have been included in the 
design of social robots in the past, they are usually called in late in the design stages when all the 
major design decisions were made. Especially in the case of children, who are a more 
challenging group when it comes to collecting design requirements, there is a lack of research in 
this regard. Therefore, our contribution to both field of HRI and Design Research concerns the 
adaption of the Double Diamond-Design Process Model to design social robots under a UCD 
approach. 
I would like to finish this thesis by acknowledging the different learning acquisitions that 
were present since the beginning of this work: from studying mechanical engineering and 
computer science to studying design research and trying to combine it with psychology. While 
this thesis demonstrates the research implications of the work, it does not make justice to all the 
challenges I came across and to the sense of bliss I felt when I was immersed in the learning 
process. 
 
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
239 
References  
Note: References marked with an asterisk symbol, “*”, indicate studies included for 
analysis in the systematic review of Chapter 3.  
 
Abbas, R., Tootell, H., Freeman, M., & Ellmers, G. (2018). Engaging Young Children as 
Application Design Partners: A Stakeholder-Inclusive Methodological Approach. IEEE 
Technology and Society Magazine, 37(3), 38-47. doi:10.1109/MTS.2018.2857584. 
Abdulla, A. M., & Cramond, B. (2018). The creative problem finding hierarchy: A suggested 
model for understanding problem finding. Creativity: Theories – Research – 
Applications(5), 197-229. 
Abras, C., Maloney-Krichmar, D., & Preece, J. (2004). User-centered design. Bainbridge, W. 
Encyclopedia of Human-Computer Interaction. Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications, 
37(4), 445-456. 
Ackermann, E., & Strohecker, C. (1999). Build, launch, convene: Sketches for constructive-
dialogic play kits. In TR99-30, Mitsubishi Electric Research Lab. 
Ackermann, E., Strohecker, C., & Agarwala, A. (1997). The Magix series of playful learning 
environments. Paper TR97–24, MERL–Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratory. 
Admoni, H., & Scassellati, B. (2017). Social eye gaze in human-robot interaction: A review. 
Journal of Human-Robot Interaction, 6(1), 25-63. doi:10.5898/JHRI.6.1.Admoni. 
Africano, D., Berg, S., Lindbergh, K., Lundholm, P., Nilbrink, F., & Persson, A. (2004, April). 
Designing tangible interfaces for children's collaboration. In CHI'04 Extended Abstracts 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 853-868). ACM. 
doi:10.1145/985921.985945. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
240 
Agrawala, M., Phan, D., Heiser, J., Haymaker, J., Klingner, J., Hanrahan, P., & Tversky, B. 
(2003, July). Designing effective step-by-step assembly instructions. In ACM 
Transactions on Graphics (TOG) (Vol. 22, No. 3, pp. 828-837). ACM. 
doi:10.1145/1201775.882352. 
*Akar, I., Sengil-Akar, S. (2013). The effectiveness of the creative reversal act (CREACT) on 
student’s creative thinking: Further evidence from Turkey. Turkish Online Journal of 
Educational Technology, 12(4), 188-191. 
Akçayır, M., & Akçayır, G. (2017). Advantages and challenges associated with augmented 
reality for education: A systematic review of the literature. Educational Research 
Review, 20, 1-11. doi:10.1016/j.edurev.2016.11.002. 
Albert, R. S., & Runco, M. A. (1999). A history of research on creativity. In R. Sternberg, 
Handbook of Creativity (pp. 16-31). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
*Alencar, E., Feldhusen, J. F., Widlak, F. W. (1999). Creativity training in elementary schools in 
Brazil. The Journal of Experimental Education, 44(4), 42-40. 
doi:10.1080/00220973.1976.11011544. 
*Alfonso-Benlliure, V., Meléndez, J. C., & García-Ballesteros, M. (2013). Evaluation of a 
creativity intervention program for preschoolers. Thinking Skills and Creativity, 10, 112-
120. doi:10.1016/j.tsc.2013.07.005. 
Ali, S., Moroso, T., & Breazeal, C. (2019, June). Can Children Learn Creativity from a Social 
Robot?. In Proceedings of the 2019 on Creativity and Cognition (pp. 359-368). ACM. 
doi: 10.1145/3325480.3325499. 
Almeida, L., & Nogueira, S. I. (2010). Estudo preliminar do teste Test for Creative Thinking-
Drawing Production (TCT-DP). Psychologica, (52-I), 193-210. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
241 
Alrutz, M. (2015). Digital storytelling and youth: Toward critically engaged praxis. Youth 
Theatre Journal, 29(1), 1-14. doi:10.1080/08929092.2015.1020184. 
Als, B. S., Jensen, J. J., & Skov, M. B. (2005, June). Comparison of think-aloud and constructive 
interaction in usability testing with children. In Proceedings of the 2005 Conference on 
Interaction Design and Children (pp. 9-16). ACM. doi:10.1145/1109540.1109542. 
Altman, D. G. (1990). Practical Statistics for Medical Research. London, UK: Chapman & Hall 
Press. 
Altman, N. S. (1992). An introduction to kernel and nearest-neighbor nonparametric 
regression. The American Statistician, 46(3), 175-185. 
Alves-Oliveira, P., Arriaga, P., Nogueira, S. I., Hoffman, G., & Paiva, A. (2016) Landscapes of 
creativity. PROSPERO: International Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews. 
Available from: 
https://www.crd.york.ac.uk/PROSPERO/display_record.php?RecordID=52101 
Alves-Oliveira, P., Arriaga, P., Paiva, A., & Hoffman, G. (2017, June). YOLO, a Robot for 
Creativity: A Co-Design Study with Children. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on 
Interaction Design and Children (pp. 423-429). ACM. doi:10.1145/3078072.3084304. 
Alves-Oliveira, P., Arriaga, P., Paiva, A., & Hoffman, G. (2019). Guide to build YOLO, a 
creativity-stimulating robot for children. HardwareX, 6, e00074. 
doi:10.1016/j.ohx.2019.e00074 
Alves-Oliveira, P., Arriaga, P., Paiva, A., & Hoffman, G. (2020). YOLO-Your Own Living 
Object. In Companion of the 2020 ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot 
Interaction (pp. 638-638). doi:10.1145/3371382.3378395. 
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
242 
Alves-Oliveira, P., Arriaga, P., Paiva, A., & Hoffman, G. (under review). Children as Robot 
Designers. CoDesign Journal. 
Alves-Oliveira, P., Gomes, S., Chandak, A., Arriaga, P., Hoffman, G., & Paiva, A. (2020). 
Software architecture for YOLO, a creativity-stimulating robot. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:1909.10823. (Decision: Revise and re-submit to SoftwareX Journal). 
Alves-Oliveira, P., Küster, D., Kappas, A., & Paiva, A. (2016, September). Psychological 
science in hri: Striving for a more integrated field of research. In 2016 AAAI Fall 
Symposium Series. Technical Reports. 
Alves-Oliveira, P., Sequeira, P., Melo, F. S., Castellano, G., & Paiva, A. (2019). Empathic robot 
for group learning: A field study. ACM Transactions on Human-Robot Interaction 
(THRI), 8(1), 3. doi:10.1145/3300188. 
Alves-Oliveira, P., Xavier, C., Arriaga, P., Hoffman, G., & Paiva, A. (under review). Creativity 
Landscapes: Systematic Review Spanning 68 Years of Creativity Interventions for 
Children. Journal of Creativity Research. 
Amabile, T. M. (1989). Growing up creative: Nurturing a lifetime of creativity. Norwalk, CT, 
US: Crown House Publishing Limited. 
Amabile, T. M. (1996). Creativity in Context: Update to the Social Psychology of Creativity. 
Boulder, CO, US: WestviewPress. 
Anderson-Bashan, L., Megidish, B., Erel, H., Wald, I., Hoffman, G., Zuckerman, O., & Grishko, 
A. (2018, August). The Greeting Machine: An Abstract Robotic Object for Opening 
Encounters. In 2018 27th IEEE International Symposium on Robot and Human 
Interactive Communication (RO-MAN) (pp. 595-602). IEEE. 
doi:10.1109/ROMAN.2018.8525516. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
243 
*Antonietti, A. (2000). Enhancing creative analogies in primary school children. North American 
Journal of Psychology, 2(1), 75-84. 
 Arbuthnott, K. D., & Sutter, G. C. (2019). Songwriting for nature: increasing nature connection 
and well-being through musical creativity. Environmental Education Research, 1-19. 
doi:10.1080/13504622.2019.1608425. 
Armbruster, B. B. (1989). Metacognition in creativity. In Glover, J. A., Royce, R. R., & 
Reynolds, C. R., Handbook of creativity (pp. 177-182). Boston, MA, USA: Springer. 
Axtell, J. (1966). Discontinuities in the perception of curiosity in gifted preadolescents. Gifted 
Child Quarterly, 10(2), 78-82. 
Ayman-Nolley, S. (1992). Vygotsky's perspective on the development of imagination and 
creativity. Creativity Research Journal, 5(1), 77-85. 
Azenkot, S., Feng, C., & Cakmak, M. (2016, March). Enabling building service robots to guide 
blind people a participatory design approach. In 2016 11th ACM/IEEE International 
Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI) (pp. 3-10). IEEE. 
doi:10.1109/HRI.2016.7451727. 
*Azevedo, I., Morais, M. F., & Martins, F. (2017). Educação para a criatividade em 
adolescentes: Uma experiência com Future Problem Solving Program Internacional. 
REICE. Revista Electrónica Iberoamericana sobre Calidad, Eficacia y Cambio en 
Educación, 15(2), 75-87. doi:10.1080/10400419209534424. 
Babineu, J. (2014). Product review: Covidence (Systematic Review Software). Journal of the 
Canadian Health Libraries Association, 35(2), 68-71. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
244 
Bacca, J., Baldiris, S., Fabregat, R., Graf, S., & Kinshuk. (2014). Augmented Reality Trends in 
Education: A Systematic Review of Research and Applications. Educational Technology 
& Society, 17 (4), 133–149. 
*Baer, J. (1996). The effects of task-specific divergent-thinking training. The Journal of Creative 
Behavior, 30(3), 183-187. doi:10.1002/j.2162-6057.1996.tb00767.x. 
Baer, J., (1998). The case for domain specificity of creativity. Creativity Research Journal, 
11(2), 173-177. doi:10.1207/s15326934crj1102_7. 
Baer, J. (2015). The importance of domain-specific expertise in creativity. Roeper Review, 37(3), 
165-178. doi:10.1080/02783193.2015.1047480. 
Baer, J. (2017). Content Matters: Why Nurturing Creativity Is So Different in Different 
Domains. In R. Beghetto, & B. Sriraman, Creative Contradictions in Education. 
Creativity Theory and Action in Education (Vol. 1, pp. 129-140). Springer, Cham. 
Baer, J., & Kaufman, J. C. (2005). Bridging generality and specificity: The amusement park 
theoretical (APT) model of creativity. Roeper Review, 27(3), 158-163. 
*Baer Jr, J. M. (1988). Long-term effects of creativity training with middle school students. The 
Journal of Early Adolescence, 8(2), 183-193. doi:10.1177/0272431688082006. 
Baer, M. (2010). The strength-of-weak-ties perspective on creativity: A comprehensive 
examination and extension. Journal of Applied Psychology, 95(3), 592-601. 
doi:10.1037/a0018761. 
Bai, Z., Blackwell, A. F., & Coulouris, G. (2012, November). Making Pretense Visible and 
Graspable: An augmented reality approach to promote pretend play. In 2012 IEEE 
International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality (ISMAR) (pp. 267-268). 
IEEE. doi:10.1109/ISMAR.2012.6402567. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
245 
Bakeman, R., & Quera, V. (2011). Sequential analysis and observational methods for the 
behavioral sciences. Cambridge University Press. 
Bandura, A. (1971). Social Learning Theory. Morristown, NJ: General Learning Press. 
Barab, S. (2006). Design-Based Research: A Methodological Toolkit for the Learning Scientist. 
Cambridge University Press. 
Baraka, K., Alves-Oliveira, P., & Ribeiro, T. (2020). An extended framework for characterizing 
social robots. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.09873. (Chapter submitted to the Evaluation 
Methods Standardization in Human-Robot Interaction Book, Springer.). 
Baraka, K., & Veloso, M. M. (2018). Mobile service robot state revealing through expressive 
lights: formalism, design, and evaluation. International Journal of Social Robotics, 10(1), 
65-92. doi:10.1007/s12369-017-0431-x. 
Barber, C. B., Dobkin, D. P., Dobkin, D. P., & Huhdanpaa, H. (1996). The quickhull algorithm 
for convex hulls. ACM Transactions on Mathematical Software (TOMS), 22(4), 469-483. 
doi: 10.1145/235815.235821. 
Bardzell, J., & Bardzell, S. (2013, April). What is critical about critical design? In Proceedings 
of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 3297-3306). 
ACM. doi:10.1145/2470654.2466451. 
Bardzell, S., Bardzell, J., Forlizzi, J., Zimmerman, J., & Antanitis, J. (2012, June). Critical design 
and critical theory: the challenge of designing for provocation. In Proceedings of the 
Designing Interactive Systems Conference (pp. 288-297). ACM. 
doi:10.1145/2317956.2318001. 
Barbot, B., Besançon, M., & I Lubart, T. (2011). Assessing creativity in the classroom. The Open 
Education Journal, 4(1). 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
246 
Barbot, B., & Heuser, B. (2017). Creativity and identity formation in adolescence: A 
developmental perspective. In M. Karwowski, & J. C. Kaufman, The Creative Self. 
London, UK: Academic Press. 
Barbot, B., & Reiter-Palmon, R. (2019). Creativity assessment: Pitfalls, solutions, and 
standards. Psychology of Aesthetics, Creativity, and the Arts, 13(2), 131. 
doi:10.1037/aca0000251. 
Batey, M., & Furnham, A. (2006). Creativity, intelligence, and personality: A critical review of 
the scattered literature. Genetic, Social, and General Psychology Monographs, 132(4), 
355-429. doi:10.3200/MONO.132.4.355-430. 
Bartneck, C., Kulić, D., Croft, E., & Zoghbi, S. (2009). Measurement instruments for the 
anthropomorphism, animacy, likeability, perceived intelligence, and perceived safety of 
robots. International Journal of Social Robotics, 1(1), 71-81. doi:10.1007/s12369-008-
0001-3. 
Bhattacharjee, T., Cabrera, M. E., Caspi, A., Cakmak, M., & Srinivasa, S. S. (2019, October). A 
Community-Centered Design Framework for Robot-Assisted Feeding Systems. In The 
21st International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility (pp. 
482-494). ACM. doi:10.1145/3308561.3353803. 
Baughman, W. A., & Mumford, M. D. (1995). Process-analytic models of creative capacities: 
Operations influencing the combination-and-reorganization process. Creativity Research 
Journal, 8(1), 37-62. doi:10.1207/s15326934crj0801_4. 
Baxter, P., Kennedy, J., Senft, E., Lemaignan, S., & Belpaeme, T. (2016, March). From 
characterising three years of HRI to methodology and reporting recommendations. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
247 
In 2016 11th ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction 
(HRI) (pp. 391-398). IEEE. doi:10.1109/HRI.2016.7451777. 
Becker, H. J. (2000). Who’s wired and who’s not: Children’s access to and use of computer 
technology. The Future of Children, 44-75. doi:10.2307/1602689. 
Beelmann, A. (2006). Systematic Reviews in the Social Sciences: A Practical Guide. European 
Psychologist, 11(3), 244-245. 
Beer, J. M., Fisk, A. D., & Rogers, W. A. (2014). Toward a framework for levels of robot 
autonomy in human-robot interaction. Journal of Human-Robot Interaction, 3(2), 74-99. 
doi:10.5898/JHRI.3.2.Beer. 
Beghetto, R. A., & Kaufman, J. C. (2010). Nurturing Creativity in the Classroom. New York, 
NY, US: Cambridge University Press. 
Belpaeme, T., Kennedy, J., Ramachandran, A., Scassellati, B., & Tanaka, F. (2018). Social 
robots for education: A review. Science robotics, 3(21), eaat5954. 
doi:10.1126/scirobotics.aat5954. 
Ben-Ari, M., & Mondada, F. (2018). Elements of robotics. Lausanne: Switzerland. Springer 
International Publishing. 
Benitti, F. B. V. (2012). Exploring the educational potential of robotics in schools: A systematic 
review. Computers & Education, 58(3), 978-988. doi:10.1016/j.compedu.2011.10.006. 
Bereczki, E. O., & Kárpáti, A. (2018). Teachers' beliefs about creativity and its nurture: A 
systematic review of the recent research literature. Educational Research Review, 23. 25-
56. doi:10.1016/j.edurev.2017.10.003. 
Berlyne, D. E. (1960). Conflict, arousal, and curiosity. New York, NY, US: McGraw-Hill Book 
Company. doi:10.1037/11164-000. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
248 
Bethel, C. L., & Murphy, R. R. (2006). Auditory and Other Non-verbal Expressions of Affect for 
Robots. In AAAI Fall Symposium: Aurally Informed Performance (pp. 1-5). 
Biddiss, E., & Irwin, J. (2010). Active video games to promote physical activity in children and 
youth: a systematic review. Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine, 164(7), 664-
672. doi:10.1001/archpediatrics.2010.104. 
Billard, A., Robins, B., Nadel, J., & Dautenhahn, K. (2007). Building Robota, a mini-humanoid 
robot for the rehabilitation of children with autism. Assistive Technology, 19(1), 37-49. 
doi:10.1080/10400435.2007.10131864. 
Birdi, K. (2016). Creativity training. In H. Shipton, P. Budhwar, & A. Brown, Human Resource 
Management, Innovation and Performance (pp. 298-312). London, UK: Palgrave 
Macmillan. 
Björgvinsson, E., Ehn, P., & Hillgren, P. A. (2010, November). Participatory design and 
democratizing innovation. In Proceedings of the 11th Biennial Participatory Design 
Conference (pp. 41-50). ACM. doi:10.1145/1900441.1900448. 
Bjorklund, D. F., & Brown, R. D. (1998). Physical play and cognitive development: Integrating 
activity, cognition, and education. Child development, 69(3), 604-606. 
doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.1998.tb06229.x. 
Blanca, M., Alarcón, R., Arnau, J., Bono, R., & Bendayan, R. (2017). Non-normal data: Is 
ANOVA still a valid option? Psicothema, 29(4), 552-557. 
doi:10.7334/psicothema2016.383 
Bloom, B. S. (1956). Taxonomy of Educational Objectives. Vol. 1: Cognitive Domain. New 
York: McKay. 
Boden, M. A. (2004). The Creative Mind: Myths and Mechanisms. London, UK: Routledge. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
249 
Borgers, N., & Hox, J. J. (2000, October). Reliability of responses in questionnaire research with 
children. In fifth international conference on logic and methodology, Cologne, Germany. 
Bose, M., Anne Garretson Folse, J., & Burton, S. (2013). The role of contextual factors in 
eliciting creativity: primes, cognitive load and expectation of performance 
feedback. Journal of Consumer Marketing, 30(5), 400-414. doi:10.1108/JCM-02-2013-
0475. 
Boucenna, S., Narzisi, A., Tilmont, E., Muratori, F., Pioggia, G., Cohen, D., & Chetouani, M. 
(2014). Interactive technologies for autistic children: A review. Cognitive 
Computation, 6(4), 722-740. doi:10.1007/s12559-014-9276-x. 
Boyle, E. A., Hainey, T., Connolly, T. M., Gray, G., Earp, J., Ott, M., Lim, T., Ninaus, M., 
Ribeiro, C., & Pereira, J. (2016). An update to the systematic literature review of 
empirical evidence of the impacts and outcomes of computer games and serious 
games. Computers & Education, 94, 178-192. doi:10.1016/j.compedu.2015.11.003. 
Bramer, W. M., Giustini, D., de Jonge, G. B., Holland, L., & Bekhuis, T. (2016) De-duplication 
of database search results for systematic reviews in EndNote. Journal of the Medical 
Library Association, 104(3), 240-243. doi:10.3163/1536-5050.104.3.014. 
Breazeal, C. (2003). Toward sociable robots. Robotics and autonomous systems, 42(3-4), 167-
175. doi:10.1016/S0921-8890(02)00373-1. 
Breazeal, C. (2004a). Designing sociable robots. Cambridge, MA, US: MIT press. 
Breazeal, C. (2004b). Social interactions in HRI: the robot view. IEEE Transactions on Systems, 
Man, and Cybernetics, Part C (Applications and Reviews), 34(2), 181-186. doi: 
10.1109/TSMCC.2004.826268. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
250 
Breazeal, C., Hoffman, G., & Lockerd, A. (2004, July). Teaching and working with robots as a 
collaboration. In Proceedings of the Third International Joint Conference on Autonomous 
Agents and Multiagent Systems-Volume 3 (pp. 1030-1037). IEEE Computer Society. 
Brenner, W., Uebernickel, F., & Abrell, T. (2016). Design thinking as mindset, process, and 
toolbox. In Design thinking for innovation (pp. 3-21). Springer, Cham. doi:10.1007/978-
3-319-26100-3_1. 
Brey, P. (2018). The strategic role of technology in a good society. Technology in Society, 52, 
39-45. 
Broekens, J., Heerink, M., & Rosendal, H. (2009). Assistive social robots in elderly care: a 
review. Gerontechnology, 8(2), 94-103. 
Brosterman, N., & Togashi, K. (1997). Inventing kindergarten. Harry N. Abrams. 
Brown, A. R., & Sorensen, A. (2009). Interacting with generative music through live 
coding. Contemporary Music Review, 28(1), 17-29. doi:10.1080/07494460802663991. 
Brown, J. G., & Burger, C. (1984). Playground designs and preschool children’s 
behaviors. Environment and Behavior, 16(5), 599-626. doi:10.1177/0013916584165004. 
Brussoni, M., Gibbons, R., Gray, C., Ishikawa, T., Sandseter, E. B. H., Bienenstock, A., Chabot, 
G., Fuselli, P., Herrington, S., Janssen, I., Pickett, W., Power, M., Stranger, N., Sampson, 
M., & Tremblay, M. S. (2015). What is the relationship between risky outdoor play and 
health in children? A systematic review. International Journal of Environmental 
Research and Public Health, 12(6), 6423-6454. doi:10.3390/ijerph120606423. 
Buechley, L., & Eisenberg, M. (2007, July). Boda blocks: A collaborative tool for exploring 
tangible three-dimensional cellular automata. In Proceedings of the 8th International 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
251 
Conference on Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (pp. 102-104). International 
Society of the Learning Sciences. 
*Burke, L. A., & Williams, J. M. (2008). Developing young thinkers: An intervention aimed to 
enhance children’s thinking skills. Thinking skills and Creativity, 3(2). 104-124. 
doi:10.1016/j.tsc.2008.01.001. 
Burnett, C. A., & Haydon, K. P. (2017). Do We need a revolutionary approach to bring creativity 
into education? In R. Beghetto, & B. Sriraman, Creative Contradictions in Education 
(pp. 201-220). Switzerland: Springer Cham. 
Byrne, J. G., & Barlow, T. (1993, October). Structured brainstorming: A method for collecting 
user requirements. In Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual 
Meeting (Vol. 37, No. 5, pp. 427-431). Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA: SAGE Publications. 
doi:10.1177/154193129303700507. 
Byron, K., Khazanchi, S., & Nazarian, D. (2010). The relationship between stressors and 
creativity: A meta-analysis examining competing theoretical models. Journal of Applied 
Psychology, 95(1). 201-212. doi:10.1037/a0017868. 
Cachia, R., Ferrari, A., Ala-Mutka, K., & Punie, Y. (2010). JRC Working Papers JRC62370. 
Retrieved 10 2019, from Joint Research Centre (Seville site): 
https://ideas.repec.org/p/ipt/iptwpa/jrc62370.html 
Cakmak, M., & Takayama, L. (2013, March). Towards a comprehensive chore list for domestic 
robots. In 2013 8th ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction 
(HRI) (pp. 93-94). IEEE. doi:10.1109/HRI.2013.6483517. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
252 
Callahan, C. M., & Renzulli, J. S. (1977). The effectiveness of a creativity training program in 
the language arts. Gifted Child Quarterly, 21(4), 538-545. 
doi:10.1177/001698627702100412. 
Cameron, D., Fernando, S., Collins, E., Millings, A., Moore, R., Sharkey, A., Evers, V., & 
Prescott, T. (2015, January). Presence of life-like robot expressions influences children's 
enjoyment of human-robot interactions in the field. In Proceedings of the AISB 
Convention 2015. The Society for the Study of Artificial Intelligence and Simulation of 
Behaviour. 
Campa, R. (2016). The rise of social robots: a review of the recent literature. Journal of 
Evolution and Technology, 26(1). 
Camurri, A., Lagerlöf, I., & Volpe, G. (2003). Recognizing emotion from dance movement: 
comparison of spectator recognition and automated techniques. International Journal of 
Human-Computer Studies, 59(1-2), 213-225. doi:10.1016/S1071-5819(03)00050-8. 
Cangelosi, A., & Schlesinger, M. (2018). From babies to robots: the contribution of 
developmental robotics to developmental psychology. Child Development Perspectives, 
12(3), 183-188. doi:10.1111/cdep.12282. 
Cecil, L. M., Gray, M. M., Thornburg, K. R., & ISPA, J. (1985). Curiosity‐exploration‐play‐
creativity: The early childhood mosaic. Early Child Development and Care, 19(3), 199-
217. doi:10.1080/0300443850190305. 
Cha, E., Dragan, A. D., & Srinivasa, S. S. (2015). Perceived robot capability. In 2015 24th IEEE 
International Symposium on Robot and Human Interactive Communication (RO-
MAN) (pp. 541-548). IEEE. doi:10.1109/ROMAN.2015.7333656. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
253 
Cha, E., Kim, Y., Fong, T., & Mataric, M. J. (2018). A survey of nonverbal signaling methods 
for non-humanoid robots. Foundations and Trends® in Robotics, 6(4), 211-323. 
doi:10.1561/2300000057. 
Chadha, D. (2006). A curriculum model for transferable skills development. engineering 
education, 1(1), 19-24. doi:10.11120/ened.2006.01010019. 
Chan, S., & Yuen, M. (2014). Personal and environmental factors affecting teachers’ creativity-
fostering practices in Hong Kong. Thinking Skills and Creativity, 12, 69-77. Doi: 
10.1016/j.tsc.2014.02.003 
Chan, Zenobia C. Y. (2013). A systematic review of creative thinking/creativity in nursing 
education. Nurse Education Today, 33(11), 1382-1387. doi:10.1016/j.nedt.2012.09.005. 
Chao, C., Cakmak, M., & Thomaz, A. L. (2010, March). Transparent active learning for robots. 
In 2010 5th ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI) 
(pp. 317-324). IEEE. doi:10.1109/HRI.2010.5453178. 
*Cheung, R. H. P. (2010). Designing movement activities to develop children’s creativity in 
early childhood education. Early Child Development and Care, 180(3), 377-385. 
doi:10.1080/03004430801931196. 
Choi, J. G., & Kim, M. (2009). The usage and evaluation of anthropomorphic form in robot 
design. Undisciplined! Design Research Society Conference 2008, Sheffield Hallam 
University, Sheffield, UK, 16-19 July 2008. 
Christie, J. F., & Roskos, K. A. (2006). Standards, Science, and the Role of Play in Literacy 
Education. In Singer, D. G., Golinkoff, R. M., Hirsh-Pasek, K. Play = Learning: How 
Play Motivates and Enhances Children's Cognitive and Social-Emotional Growth: How 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
254 
Play Motivates and Enhances Children's Cognitive and Social-Emotional Growth. New 
York, NY, US: Oxford University Press. 
Claxton, A. F., Pannells, T. C., & Rhoads, P. A. (2005). Developmental trends in the creativity of 
school-age children. Creativity Research Journal, 17(4), 327-335. 
*Cliatt, M. J. P., Shaw, J. M., & Sherwood, J. M. (1980). Effects of training on the divergent-
thinking abilities of kindergarten children. Child Development, 51(4), 1061-1064. 
doi:10.2307/1129544. 
Collard, P., & Looney, J. (2014). Nurturing creativity in education. European Journal of 
Education, 49(3), 348-364. 
Collins, N., McLean, A., Rohrhuber, J., & Ward, A. (2003). Live coding in laptop 
performance. Organised sound, 8(3), 321-330. doi:10.1017/S135577180300030X. 
Colton, S. (2012). The painting fool: Stories from building an automated painter. In Computers 
and creativity (pp. 3-38). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-31727-
9_1. 
Colton, S., Halskov, J., Ventura, D., Gouldstone, I., Cook, M., & Ferrer, B. P. (2015, June). The 
Painting Fool Sees! New Projects with the Automated Painter. In ICCC (pp. 189-196). 
Conradty, C., & Bogner, F. X. (2018). From STEM to STEAM: How to Monitor Creativity. 
Creativity Research Journal, 30(3), 233-240. doi:10.1080/10400419.2018.1488195. 
Conti, R., Collins, M. A., & Picariello, M. L. (2001). The impact of competition on intrinsic 
motivation and creativity: considering gender, gender segregation and gender role 
orientation. Personality and Individual Differences, 31(8), 1273-1289. 
doi:10.1016/S0191-8869(00)00217-8. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
255 
Corbalán J., Martínez F., Donolo, D., Alonso, C., Tejerina, M. Limiñana (2003). CREA. 
Inteligencia Creativa. Una medida cognitiva de la creatividad. 
Correia, F., Petisca, S., Alves-Oliveira, P., Ribeiro, T., Melo, F. S., & Paiva, A. (2019). “I 
Choose... YOU!” Membership preferences in human–robot teams. Autonomous 
Robots, 43(2), 359-373. doi:10.1007/s10514-018-9767-9. 
Costa Jr, P. T., & McCrae, R. R. (2008). The Revised NEO Personality Inventory (NEO-PI-R). 
In Boyle, G. B., Matthews, G., & Saklofske, D. H. (Eds.) The SAGE Handbook of 
Personality Theory and Assessment: Volume 2 - Personality Measurement and Testing. 
SAGE Publications Ltd. 
Costa, P. T., & McCrae, R. R. (2010). NEO-PI-3. London: Sigma Assessment Systems. 
Council, B. D. (2005). The Design Process: The ‘Double Diamond’ Design Process Model. 
Retrieved 27 November from: http://www. designcouncil. org. uk/about-design/how-
designers-work/the-design-process/. 
Cronin, M. A., & Loewenstein, J. (2018). The Craft of Creativity. Stanford, CA, US: Stanford 
University Press. 
Cropley, A. J. (1997). Fostering creativity in the classroom: General principals. In M. A. Runco, 
The Creativity Research Handbook (Vol. 1). Norwood, NJ, US: Ablex. 
Cropley, A. J. (2006). In praise of convergent thinking. Creativity research journal, 18(3), 391-
404. doi:10.1207/s15326934crj1803_13. 
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1997). Flow and the psychology of discovery and invention. Harper 
Perennial, New York, 56. 
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1999). 16 implications of a systems perspective for the study of creativity. 
In R. J. Sternberg, Handbook of Creativity. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
256 
Cuddy, A. J., Fiske, S. T., & Glick, P. (2008). Warmth and competence as universal dimensions 
of social perception: The stereotype content model and the BIAS map. Advances in 
Experimental Social Psychology, 40, 61-149. doi:10.1016/S0065-2601(07)00002-0 
Dacey, J. S. (1989). Peak periods of creative growth across the lifespan. The Journal of Creative 
Behavior, 23(4), 224-247. 
Damodaran, L. (1996). User involvement in the systems design process-a practical guide for 
users. Behaviour & information technology, 15(6), 363-377. 
doi:10.1080/014492996120049. 
*Dansky, J. L. (1980). Make-believe: A mediator of the relationship between play and 
associative fluency. Child Development, 51(2), 576-579. doi:10.2307/1129296. 
*Dansky, J. L., & Silverman, I. W. (1973). Effects of play on associative fluency in preschool-
aged children. Developmental Psychology, 9(1), 38-43. doi:10.1037/h0035076. 
Derks, P., & Hervas, D. (1988). Creativity in humor production: Quantity and quality in 
divergent thinking. Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society, 26(1), 37-39. 
doi:10.3758/BF03334854. 
Davies, D., Jindal-Snape, D., Collier, C., Digby, R., Hay, P., & Howe, A. (2013). Creative 
learning environments in education — A systematic literature review. Thinking Skills and 
Creativity, 8, 80-91. 
Davies, D., Jindal-Snape, D., Collier, C., Digby, R., Howe, A., Collier, C., & Hay, P. (2014). 
The roles and development needs of teachers to promote creativity: A systematic review 
of literature. Teaching and Teacher Education, 41, 34-41. doi:10.1016/j.tate.2014.03.003 
Davies, T. (2006). Creative teaching and learning in Europe: Promoting a new paradigm. The 
Curriculum Journal, 17(1), 37-57. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
257 
Dautenhahn, K., & Billard, A. (1999, September). Studying robot social cognition within a 
developmental psychology framework. In 1999 Third European Workshop on Advanced 
Mobile Robots (Eurobot'99). Proceedings (Cat. No. 99EX355) (pp. 187-194). IEEE. 
doi:10.1109/EURBOT.1999.827639. 
Dautenhahn, K., Woods, S., Kaouri, C., Walters, M. L., Koay, K. L., & Werry, I. (2005, August). 
What is a robot companion-friend, assistant or butler?. In 2005 IEEE/RSJ international 
conference on intelligent robots and systems (pp. 1192-1197). 
doi:10.1109/IROS.2005.1545189. 
De Dreu, C. K., Baas, M., & Nijstad, B. A. (2008). Hedonic tone and activation level in the 
mood-creativity link: toward a dual pathway to creativity model. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 94(5), 739. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.94.5.739. 
De Dreu, C. K., & West, M. A. (2001). Minority dissent and team innovation: The importance of 
participation in decision making. Journal of Applied Psychology, 86(6), 1191. 
doi:10.1037/0021-9010.86.6.1191. 
de Jesus, S. N., Rus, C. L., Lens, W., & Imaginário, S. (2013). Intrinsic motivation and creativity 
related to product: A meta-analysis of the studies published between 1990-2010. 
Creativity Research Journal, 25(1), 80-84. doi:10.1080/10400419.2013.752235. 
de Rooij, A., Vromans, R. D., & Dekker, M. (2018). Noradrenergic modulation of creativity: 
evidence from pupillometry. Creativity Research Journal, 30(4), 339-351. 
doi:10.1080/10400419.2018.1530533. 
DeVries, R. (2006). Games with Rules. In D.P. Fromberg & D. Bergen (Eds) Play from Birth to 
Twelve, 2nd Ed. Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
258 
Diana, C., & Thomaz, A. L. (2011, May). The shape of Simon: Creative design of a humanoid 
robot shell. In CHI'11 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 
283-298). ACM. doi:10.1145/1979742.1979648. 
Di Blas, N., Paolini, P., & Sabiescu, A. (2010, June). Collective digital storytelling at school as a 
whole-class interaction. In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on 
interaction Design and Children (pp. 11-19). ACM. Doi:10.1145/1810543.1810546. 
Diehl, J. J., Schmitt, L. M., Villano, M., & Crowell, C. R. (2012). The clinical use of robots for 
individuals with autism spectrum disorders: A critical review. Research in Autism 
Spectrum Disorders, 6(1), 249-262. doi:10.1016/j.rasd.2011.05.006. 
DiSalvo, C., & Gemperle, F. (2003, June). From seduction to fulfillment: the use of 
anthropomorphic form in design. In Proceedings of the 2003 International Conference on 
Designing Pleasurable Products and Interfaces (pp. 67-72). ACM. 
Dollinger, S. J., Urban, K. K., & James, T. A. (2004). Creativity and openness: Further 
validation of two creative product measures. Creativity Research Journal, 16(1), 35-47. 
doi: /10.1207/s15326934crj1601_4. 
Donohue, C. (Ed.). (2014). Technology and digital media in the early years: Tools for teaching 
and learning. Routledge. 
Dougherty, D. (2012). The maker movement. Innovations: Technology, Governance, 
Globalization, 7(3), 11-14. 
Dougherty, D. (2013). The maker mindset. In Design, make, play (pp. 25-29). Routledge. 
Donker, A., & Reitsma, P. (2004, June). Usability testing with young children. In Proceedings of 
the 2004 Conference on Interaction Design and Children: Building a Community (pp. 43-
48). ACM. doi:10.1145/1017833.1017839. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
259 
*Doron, E. (2016). Short term intervention model for enhancing divergent thinking among 
school aged children. Creativity Research Journal, 28(3), 372-378. 
doi:10.1080/10400419.2016.1195616. 
Dragan, A. D., Lee, K. C., & Srinivasa, S. S. (2013, March). Legibility and predictability of 
robot motion. In Proceedings of the 8th ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-
Robot Interaction (pp. 301-308). IEEE Press. 
Druga, S., Williams, R., Park, H. W., & Breazeal, C. (2018, June). How smart are the smart 
toys?: children and parents’ agent interaction and intelligence attribution. In Proceedings 
of the 17th ACM Conference on Interaction Design and Children (pp. 231-240). ACM. 
doi:10.1145/3202185.3202741. 
Druin, A. (2002). The role of children in the design of new technology. Behaviour and 
Information Technology, 21(1), 1-25. 
Druin, A., & Solomon, C. (1996). Designing Multimedia Environments for Children: Computers, 
Creativity, and Kids. Wiley Computer Publishing, John Wiley and Sons, Inc., One Wiley 
Drive, Somerset, NJ 08875. 
Druin, A., Stewart, J., Proft, D., Bederson, B., & Hollan, J. (1997, March). KidPad: a design 
collaboration between children, technologists, and educators. In CHI (Vol. 97, pp. 463-
470). 
Dubina, I. M., Carayannis, E. G., & Campbell, D. F. (2012). Creativity economy and a crisis of 
the economy? Coevolution of knowledge, innovation, and creativity, and of the 
knowledge economy and knowledge society. Journal of the Knowledge Economy, 3(1), 
1-24. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
260 
*Dziedziewicz, D., Gajda, A., & Karwowski, M. (2014). Developing children’s intercultural 
competence and creativity. Thinking Skills and Creativity,139, 32-42. doi: 
10.1016/j.tsc.2014.02.006. 
*Dziedziewicz, D., Oledzka, D., & Karwowski, M. (2013). Developing 4-to 6-year-old 
children’s figural creativity using a doodle-book program. Thinking Skills and Creativity, 
9, 85-95. doi:10.1016/j.tsc.2012.09.004. 
Ekman, P. (1992). An argument for basic emotions. Cognition & emotion, 6(3-4), 169-200. 
doi:10.1080/02699939208411068. 
Ekman, P., Friesen, W. V., & Ellsworth, P. (2013). Emotion in the human face: Guidelines for 
research and an integration of findings (Vol. 11). Elsevier. 
Elbow, P. (1983). Teaching thinking by teaching writing. Change: The Magazine of Higher 
Learning, 15(6), 37-40. doi:10.1080/00091383.1983.10570005. 
Elkind, D. (2008). The Power of Play: Learning What Comes Naturally. American Journal of 
Play, 1(1), 1-6. 
Elumeze, N., & Eisenberg, M. (2005, November). SmartTiles: mobility and wireless 
programmability in children’s construction and crafts. In IEEE International Workshop 
on Wireless and Mobile Technologies in Education (WMTE'05) (pp. 8-pp). IEEE. 
doi:10.1109/WMTE.2005.58. 
Ennis, R. H. (1962). A concept of critical thinking. Harvard Educational Review, 32(1), 81-111. 
Epley, N., Waytz, A., & Cacioppo, J. T. (2007). On seeing human: A three-factor theory of 
anthropomorphism. Psychological review, 114(4), 864. doi:10.1037/0033-
295X.114.4.864. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
261 
Erat, S., & Gneezy, U. (2016). Incentives for creativity. Experimental Economics, 19(2), 269-
280. 
European Comission. (2006, 12 18). Publications Office of the European Union. Retrieved 10 
2019, from Europa: https://publications.europa.eu/en/publication-detail/-
/publication/0259ec35-9594-4648-b5a4-fb2b23218096 
European Communities (2007). Key competences for lifelong learning – A European framework. 
Annex of a Recommendation of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 
December 2006 published in the Official 
Journal of the European Union on 30 December 2006/L394. Retrieved from 
http://eurlex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/site/en/oj/2006/l_394/l_ 39420061230en00100018.pdf. 
 
Eysenck, H. J. (2003). Creativity, personality and the convergent-divergent continuum. In 
Runco, M. A. Critical Creative Processes: Perspectives on Creativity Research (pp. 95-
114). Cresskill, NJ, US: Hampton Press. 
Eyssel, F. (2017). An experimental psychological perspective on social robotics. Robotics and 
Autonomous Systems, 87, 363-371. doi:10.1016/j.robot.2016.08.029. 
Fails, J. A., Guha, M. L., & Druin, A. (2013). Methods and techniques for involving children in 
the design of new technology for children. Foundations and Trends® in Human–
Computer Interaction, 6(2), 85-166. doi:10.1561/1100000018. 
Fasola, J., & Mataric, M. (2011). Comparing physical and virtual embodiment in a socially 
assistive robot exercise coach for the elderly. Center for Robotics and Embedded 
Systems, Los Angeles, CA. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
262 
Faul, F., Erdfelder, E., Lang, A. G., & Buchner, A. (2007). G* Power 3: A flexible statistical 
power analysis program for the social, behavioral, and biomedical sciences. Behavior 
Research Methods, 39(2), 175-191. doi:10.3758/BF03193146. 
Feist, G. J. (1998). A meta-analysis of personality in scientific and artistic creativity. Personality 
and Social Psychology Review, 2(4), 290-309. doi:10.1207/s15327957pspr0204_5. 
Feist, G. J. (1999). Autonomy and independence. In Runco, M. A., & Pritzker, S. R., 
Encyclopedia of Creativity (pp. 151-163). San Diego, CA, USA: Academic Press. 
*Feldhusen, J. F., Bahlke, S. J., & Treffinger, D. J. (1969). Teaching creative thinking. The 
Elementary School Journal, 70(1), 48-53. doi:10.1086/460544 
Feldman, D. H. (1999). The development of creativity. In R. J. Sternberg, Handbook of 
Creativity (pp. 169-188). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Field, A. (2009). Discovering Statistics Using SPSS, Third Edition. 
Fink, A., Grabner, R. H., Gebauer, D., Reishofer, G., Koschutnig, K., & Ebner, F. (2010). 
Enhancing creativity by means of cognitive stimulation: Evidence from an fMRI study. 
NeuroImage, 52(4), 1687-1695. 
Fink, J., Lemaignan, S., Dillenbourg, P., Rétornaz, P., Vaussard, F., Berthoud, A., ondada, F., 
Wille, F., & Franinović, K. (2014, March). Which robot behavior can motivate children 
to tidy up their toys? Design and evaluation of ranger. In Proceedings of the 2014 
ACM/IEEE international Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (pp. 439-446). ACM. 
doi:10.1145/2559636.2559659. 
Fischer, G. (2005). Social creativity: Making all voices heard. University of Colorado Center for 
LifeLong Learning and Design Department of Computer Science. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
263 
Fischer, G. (2007, September). Meta-design and social creativity: making all voices heard. 
In IFIP Conference on Human-Computer Interaction (pp. 692-693). Springer, Berlin, 
Heidelberg. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-74800-7_86 
Fischer, G., Giaccardi, E., Eden, H., Sugimoto, M., & Ye, Y. (2005). Beyond binary choices: 
Integrating individual and social creativity. International Journal of Human-Computer 
Studies, 63(4-5), 482-512. doi:10.1016/j.ijhcs.2005.04.014. 
Fiske, S. T., Cuddy, A. J. C., Glick, P., & Xu, J. (2002). A model of stereotype content as often 
mixed: Separate dimensions of competence and warmth respectively follow from status 
and competition. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 82(6), 878-902. 
*Flaherty, M. A. (1992). The effects of a holistic creativity program on the self-concept and 
creativity of third graders. The Journal of Creative Behavior, 26(3), 186-198. 
doi:10.1002/j.2162-6057.1992.tb01173.x. 
*Fleith, D. S., Renzulli, J. S., & Westberg, K. L. (2002). Effects of a creativity training program 
on divergent thinking abilities and self-concept in monolingual and bilingual classrooms. 
Creativity Research Journal, 14(3-4), 373-386. doi:10.1207/S15326934CRJ1434_8. 
Friedman, B. (1996). Value sensitive design. Interactions, 3(6), 16-23. ACM 
Friedman, B., & Hendry, D. G. (2019). Value sensitive design: Shaping technology with moral 
imagination. Mit Press. 
Florida, R. (2005). Cities and the creative class. New York: Harper Business. 
Fong, T., Nourbakhsh, I., & Dautenhahn, K. (2003). A survey of socially interactive 
robots. Robotics and Autonomous Systems, 42(3-4), 143-166. doi:10.1016/S0921-
8890(02)00372-X. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
264 
Ford, D. Y., & Harris III, J. J. (1992). The elusive definition of creativity. The Journal of 
Creative Behavior, 26(3), 186-198. 
Forlizzi, J. (2008). The product ecology: Understanding social product use and supporting design 
culture. International Journal of Design, 2(1). 
*Franklin, B. S., & Richards, P. N. (1977). Effects on children's divergent thinking abilities of a 
period of direct teaching for divergent production. British Journal of Educational 
Psychology, 47(1), 66-70. doi:10.1111/j.2044-8279.1977.tb03002.x. 
Frei, P., Su, V., Mikhak, B., & Ishii, H. (2000, April). Curlybot: Designing a new class of 
computational toys. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (pp. 129-136). ACM. 
Freud, S. (1959). Creative Writers and Day-dreaming. London, UK: Hogarth Press. 
Freytag, G. (1872). Die technik des dramas. Hirzel. 
Freytag, G. (1896). Freytag's technique of the drama: an exposition of dramatic composition and 
art. Scholarly Press. 
Frich, J., MacDonald Vermeulen, L., Remy, C., Biskjaer, M. M., & Dalsgaard, P. (2019, April). 
Mapping the landscape of creativity support tools in HCI. In Proceedings of the 2019 
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (p. 389). ACM. 
doi:10.1145/3290605.3300619. 
Frith, U., & Frith, C. (2010). The social brain: allowing humans to boldly go where no other 
species has been. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 
365(1537), 165-176. doi:10.1098/rstb.2009.0160. 
Frost, J. L. (1992). Play and Playscapes: Instructor’s Guide. Delmar Publishers. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
265 
Fuchs, M. (2008). The reliability of children’s survey responses: the impact of cognitive 
functioning on respondent behavior. In Proceedings of Statistics Canada Symposium. 
Furnham, A., & Bachtiar, V. (2008). Personality and intelligence as predictors of creativity. 
Personality and individual differences, 45(7), 613-617.doi: 10.1016/j.paid.2008.06.023. 
Gajda, A., Karwowski, M., & Beghetto, R. A. (2017). Creativity and academic achievement: A 
meta-analysis. Journal of Educational Psychology, 109(2), 269-299. 
doi:10.1037/edu0000133 
Gabe, T., Florida, R., & Mellander, C. (2012). The creative class and the crisis. Cambridge 
Journal of Regions, Economy and Society, 6(1), 37-53. 
*Garaigordobil Landazabal, M. (2005). Prosocial and creative play: Effects of a programme on 
the verbal and nonverbal intelligence of children aged 10-11 years. International Journal 
of Psychology, 40(3), 176-188. doi:10.1080/00207590444000276. 
*Garaigordobil, M. (2006). Intervention in creativity with children aged 10 and 11 years: Impact 
of a play program on verbal and graphic-figural creativity. Creativity Research Journal, 
18(3), 329-345. doi:10.1207/s15326934crj1803_8. 
*Garaigordobil, M. & Berrueco, L. (2011). Effects of a play program on creative thinking of 
preschool children. The Spanish Journal of Psychology, 14(2), 608-618. 
doi:10.5209/rev_SJOP.2011.v14.n2.9. 
Gardner, H. (1982). Giftedness: Speculations from a biological perspective. New Directions for 
Child and Adolescent Development, 17, 47-60. 
Gardner, H., & Gardner, E. (2008). Art, mind, and brain: A cognitive approach to creativity. 
New York, NY, US: Basic Books. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
266 
Gardner, H., Kornhaber, M. L., & Wake, W. K. (1996). Intelligence: Multiple Perspectives. 
Harcourt Brace College Publishers. 
Garrison, D. R., Cleveland-Innes, M., Koole, M., & Kappelman, J. (2006). Revisiting 
methodological issues in transcript analysis: Negotiated coding and reliability. The 
Internet and Higher Education, 9(1), 1-8. doi:10.1016/j.iheduc.2005.11.001. 
Gervás, P. (2001). An expert system for the composition of formal spanish poetry. 
In Applications and Innovations in Intelligent Systems VIII (pp. 19-32). Springer, 
London. doi:10.1007/978-1-4471-0275-5_2. 
Gibson, F. (2007). Conducting focus groups with children and young people: strategies for 
success. Journal of Research in Nursing, 12(5), 473-483. 
doi:10.1177/1744987107079791. 
Gilbert, A. N., Fridlund, A. J., & Lucchina, L. A. (2016). The color of emotion: A metric for 
implicit color associations. Food Quality and Preference, 52, 203-210. 
doi:10.1016/j.foodqual.2016.04.007. 
Gillespie, R. M. (2002). The physical impact of computers and electronic game use on children 
and adolescents, a review of current literature. Work, 18(3), 249-259. 
Glas, D. F., Minato, T., Ishi, C. T., Kawahara, T., & Ishiguro, H. (2016, August). Erica: The 
erato intelligent conversational android. In 2016 25th IEEE International Symposium on 
Robot and Human Interactive Communication (RO-MAN) (pp. 22-29). IEEE. 
doi:10.1109/ROMAN.2016.7745086. 
Glaser, B. G., Strauss, A. L., & Strutzel, E. (1968). The discovery of grounded theory; strategies 
for qualitative research. Nursing Research, 17(4), 364. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
267 
Glaveanu, V. (2018). Creativity in and for Society. Creativity: Theories-Research-Applications, 
5(2), 155-158. 
Gomez, R., Szapiro, D., Galindo, K., & Nakamura, K. (2018, February). Haru: Hardware design 
of an experimental tabletop robot assistant. In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM/IEEE 
international conference on human-robot interaction (pp. 233-240). ACM. 
doi:10.1145/3171221.3171288. 
Goodrich, M. A., & Schultz, A. C. (2008). Human-robot interaction: a survey. Foundations and 
Trends® in Human–Computer Interaction, 1(3), 203-275. doi:10.1561/1100000005. 
*Goor, A., & Rapoport, T. (1977). Enhancing creativity in an informal educational framework. 
Journal of Educational Psychology, 69(5), 636-643. doi:10.1037/0022-0663.69.5.636. 
Gopnik, A., Griffiths, T. L., & Lucas, C. G. (2015). When younger learners can be better (or at 
least more open-minded) than older ones. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 
24(2), 87-92. doi:10.1177/0963721414556653. 
*Gordon, G., Breazeal, C., & Engel, S. (2015, March). Can children catch curiosity from a 
social robot? Paper presented at the 10th ACM/IEEE International Conference on 
Human-Robot Interaction, 91-98, Portland, Oregon, USA. doi:10.1037/0022-
0663.69.5.636. 
Gouaillier, D., Hugel, V., Blazevic, P., Kilner, C., Monceaux, J., Lafourcade, P., Marnier, B., 
Serre, J., & Maisonnier, B. (2009, May). Mechatronic design of NAO humanoid. In 2009 
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (pp. 769-774). IEEE. 
doi:10.1109/ROBOT.2009.5152516. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
268 
Graf, C., Härtl, A., Röfer, T., & Laue, T. (2009, December). A robust closed-loop gait for the 
standard platform league humanoid. In Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop on 
Humanoid Soccer Robots (pp. 30-37). 
Greitemeyer, T., & Mügge, D. O. (2014). Video games do affect social outcomes: A meta-
analytic review of the effects of violent and prosocial video game play. Personality and 
social psychology bulletin, 40(5), 578-589. doi:10.1177/0146167213520459. 
Gruber, H. E., & Vonèche, J. J. (Eds.). (1977). The Essential Piaget (pp. 435-436). London: 
Routledge & Kegan Paul. 
Grudin, J. (2017). Obstacles to participatory design in large product development organizations. 
In Participatory Design (pp. 99-119). CRC Press. 
Gruenfeld, D. H. (1995). Status, ideology, and integrative complexity on the US Supreme Court: 
Rethinking the politics of political decision making. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 68(1), 5. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.68.1.5. 
Guilford, J. P. (1950). Creativity. American Psychologist, 5(9), 444-454. doi:10.1037/h0063487 
Guilford, J. P. (1967). The nature of human intelligence. New York, NY, US: McGraw-Hill. 
Guilford, J. P. (1968). Intelligence, creativity, and their educational implications. Edits Pub. 
Gulliksen, J., Lantz, A., & Boivie, I. (1999). User centered design in practice-problems and 
possibilities. Sweden: Royal Institute of Technology, 315, 433. 
Gunderson, J. P., & Gunderson, L. F. (2004). Intelligence, autonomy, capability. Performance 
Metrics for Intelligent Systems, PERMIS. 
Haensly PA, Torrance EP. Assessment of creativity in children and adolescents. In: Reynolds 
CR, Kamphaus RW, Eds. Handbook of Psychological and Educational Assessment of 
Children: Intelligence and achievement New York: Guilford Press 1990; pp.697-722. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
269 
*Haley, G. L. (1984). Creative response styles: The effects of socioeconomic status and 
problem-solving training. Journal of Creative Behavior, 18(1), 25-40. 
doi:10.1002/j.2162-6057.1984.tb00987.x. 
Hall, E. T. (1966). The hidden dimension (Vol. 609). Garden City, NY: Doubleday. 
Halverson, E. R., & Sheridan, K. (2014). The maker movement in education. Harvard 
Educational Review, 84(4), 495-504. doi:10.17763/haer.84.4.34j1g68140382063. 
Hampton, J. A. (1987). Inheritance of attributes in natural concept conjunctions. Memory & 
Cognition, 15(1), 55-71. doi:10.3758/BF03197712. 
Hanna, W. (2007). The new Bloom's taxonomy: Implications for music education. Arts 
Education Policy Review, 108(4), 7-16. 
Harms, M., Kennel, V., & Reiter-Palmon, R. (2017). Team creativity: Cognitive processes 
underlying problem solving. In Team creativity and innovation (pp. 61-86). Oxford 
University Press. doi:10.1093/oso/9780190222093.003.0004. 
Harris, K., & Reid, D. (2005). The influence of virtual reality play on children's 
motivation. Canadian journal of occupational therapy, 72(1), 21-29. 
doi:10.1177/000841740507200107. 
Hart, J. P. (2008). Art of the Storyboard. Elsevier Science & Technology. 
Hassinger-Das, B., Toub, T. S., Zosh, J. M., Michnick, J., Golinkoff, R., & Hirsh-Pasek, K. 
(2017). More than just fun: a place for games in playful learning/Más que diversión: el 
lugar de los juegos reglados en el aprendizaje lúdico. Infancia y Aprendizaje, 40(2), 191-
218. doi:10.1080/02103702.2017.1292684. 
Hazel, N. (1995). Elicitation techniques with young people. Social Research Update, 12(4), 1-8. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
270 
Healey, A., & Mendelsohn, A. (2019). Selecting appropriate toys for young children in the 
digital era. Pediatrics, 143(1), e20183348. doi:10.1542/peds.2018-3348. 
Hemphill, M. (1996). A note on adults’ color–emotion associations. The Journal of Genetic 
Psychology, 157(3), 275-280. doi:10.1080/00221325.1996.9914865. 
Hennessey, B. A., Amabile, T. M., & Mueller, J. S. (1999). Consensual 
assessment. Encyclopedia of Creativity, 1, 346-359. 
Hennessey, B. A. (2016). Intrinsic Motivation and Creativity in the Classroom. Nurturing 
creativity in the classroom. 
Ho, W. C., Dautenhahn, K., Lim, M. Y., & Du Casse, K. (2010, August). Modelling Human 
Memory in Robotic Companions for Personalisation and Long-term Adaptation in HRI. 
In BICA (pp. 64-71). 
Hoffman, G. (2016, March). Openwoz: A runtime-configurable wizard-of-oz framework for 
human-robot interaction. In 2016 AAAI Spring Symposium Series. 
Hoffman, G., & Ju, W. (2014). Designing robots with movement in mind. Journal of Human-
Robot Interaction, 3(1), 91-122. doi:10.5898/JHRI.3.1.Hoffman. 
Hoffman, G., Zuckerman, O., Hirschberger, G., Luria, M., & Shani Sherman, T. (2015, March). 
Design and evaluation of a peripheral robotic conversation companion. In Proceedings of 
the Tenth Annual ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (pp. 
3-10). ACM. doi:10.1145/2696454.2696495. 
*Hoffmann, J. D., & Russ, S. W. (2016). Fostering pretend play skills and creativity in 
elementary school girls: A group play intervention. Psychology of Aesthetics, Creativity, 
and the Arts, 10(1), 114. doi:10.1037/aca0000039. 
Homans, G. C. (1974). Social Behavior: Its Elementary Forms. Harcourt Brace Jovanovich 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
271 
Honey, M., & Kanter, D. E. (Eds.). (2013). Design, make, play: Growing the next generation of 
STEM innovators. Routledge. 
Hopkins, E. J., Dore, R. A., & Lillard, A. S. (2015). Do children learn from pretense? Journal of 
Experimental Child Psychology, 130, 1-18. doi:10.1016/j.jecp.2014.09.004. 
*Houtz, J. C., & Feldhusen, J. F. (1976). The modification of fourth graders’ problem solving 
abilities. The Journal of Psychology, 93(2), 229-237. 
doi:10.1080/00223980.1976.9915817. 
Houtz, J. C., & Krug, D. (1995). Assessment of creativity: Resolving a mid-life crisis. 
Educational Psychology Review, 7(3), 269-300. doi:10.1007/BF02213374. 
Hoyle, R. H., Harris, M. J., & Judd, C. M. (2002). Research Methods in Social Relations. US: 
Wadsworth/Thomson Learning. 
Hsin, C. T., Li, M. C., & Tsai, C. C. (2014). The influence of young children’s use of technology 
on their learning: A review. Journal of Educational Technology & Society, 17(4), 85-99. 
*Huber, J., Treffinger, D., Tracy, D., & Rand, D. (1979). Self-instructional use of programmed 
creativity-training materials with gifted and regular students. Journal of Educational 
Psychology, 71(3), 303-309. doi:10.1037/0022-0663.71.3.303. 
*Hui, A., & Lau, S. (2006). Drama education: A touch of the creative mind and communicative-
expressive ability of elementary school children in Hong Kong. Thinking Skills and 
Creativity, 1(1), 34-40. doi:10.1016/j.tsc.2005.06.001. 
Hutchby, I., & Moran-Ellis, J. (2013). Children, technology and culture: The impacts of 
technologies in children's everyday lives. Routledge. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
272 
Hutton, E., & Sundar, S. S. (2010). Can video games enhance creativity? Effects of emotion 
generated by Dance Dance Revolution. Creativity Research Journal, 22(3), 294-303. Doi: 
10.1080/10400419.2010.503540. 
Ibáñez, M. B., & Delgado-Kloos, C. (2018). Augmented reality for STEM learning: A systematic 
review. Computers & Education, 123, 109-123. doi:10.1016/j.compedu.2018.05.002. 
Irfan, B., Kennedy, J., Lemaignan, S., Papadopoulos, F., Senft, E., & Belpaeme, T. (2018, 
March). Social psychology and human-robot interaction: An uneasy marriage. In 
Companion of the 2018 ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot 
Interaction (pp. 13-20). ACM. doi:10.1145/3173386.3173389. 
Ishiyama, J. (2014). Replication, research transparency, and journal publications: Individualism, 
community models, and the future of replication studies. PS: Political Science & Politics, 
47(1), 78-83. doi:10.1017/S1049096513001765. 
Ivcevic, Z. (2009). Creativity map: Toward the next generation of theories of creativity. 
Psychology of Aesthetics, Creativity, and the Arts, 3(1), 17-21. 
Iversen, O. S., Smith, R. C., & Dindler, C. (2017, June). Child as protagonist: Expanding the role 
of children in participatory design. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Interaction 
Design and Children (pp. 27-37). ACM. doi:10.1145/3078072.3079725. 
Jack, R. E., Garrod, O. G., & Schyns, P. G. (2014). Dynamic facial expressions of emotion 
transmit an evolving hierarchy of signals over time. Current biology, 24(2), 187-192. 
doi:10.1016/j.cub.2013.11.064. 
Jacq, A., Lemaignan, S., Garcia, F., Dillenbourg, P., & Paiva, A. (2016, March). Building 
successful long child-robot interactions in a learning context. In 11th ACM/IEEE 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
273 
International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI) (pp. 239-246). IEEE. 
doi:10.1109/HRI.2016.7451758. 
Janssen, I., & LeBlanc, A. G. (2010). Systematic review of the health benefits of physical 
activity and fitness in school-aged children and youth. International Journal of 
Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity, 7(1), 40. doi:10.1186/1479-5868-7-40. 
Jausovec, N. (1994). Can giftedness be taught? Roeper Review, 16(3), 210-214. 
doi:10.1080/02783199409553576. 
Jellen, H. G., & Urban, K. K. (1986). The TCT-DP (Test for Creative Thinking-Drawing 
Production): An instrument that can be applied to most age and ability groups. Creative 
Child & Adult Quarterly. 
Jellen, H. G., & Urban, K. K. (1989). Assessing creative potential world-wide: the first cross-
cultural application of the test for creative thinking—drawing production (TCT-
DP). Gifted Education International, 6(2), 78-86. doi:10.1177/026142948900600204. 
Jensen, J. J., & Skov, M. B. (2005, June). A review of research methods in children's technology 
design. In Proceedings of the 2005 Conference on Interaction Design and Children (pp. 
80-87). ACM. doi:10.1145/1109540.1109551. 
John, O. P., & Srivastava, S. (1999). The Big Five trait taxonomy: History, measurement, and 
theoretical perspectives. In Pervin, L. A., & John, O. P. (Eds). Handbook of Personality: 
Theory and Research, 2(1999) (pp. 102-138). London, UK: The Guilford Press. 
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1988). Freedom and constraint in creativity. In Sternberg, R. J., The 
Nature of Creativity: Contemporary Psychological Perspectives (pp. 202-219). New 
York, NY, USA: Cambridge University Press. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
274 
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1988). Analogy and the exercise of creativity. In Vosniadou, S., & Ortony, 
A., Similarity and Analogical Reasoning (pp. 313-331). New York, NY, USA: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Jones, J. K. (2013). Re-discovering the arts: The impact of engagement in a natural environment 
upon pre-service teacher perceptions of creativity. Thinking Skills and Creativity, 8, 102-
108. doi:10.1016/j.tsc.2012.08.001. 
Jordan, P. W. (1998). Human factors for pleasure in product use. Applied ergonomics, 29(1), 25-
33. doi:10.1016/S0003-6870(97)00022-7. 
Ju, W. (2015). The design of implicit interactions. Synthesis Lectures on Human-Centered 
Informatics, 8(2), 1-93. doi:10.2200/S00619ED1V01Y201412HCI028. 
*Justo, C. F. (2008). Creative relaxation, motor creativity, self-concept in a sample of children 
from Early Childhood Education. Electronic Journal of Research in Educational 
Psychology, 6(1), 29-50. 
Kahn, P. H., Freier, N. G., Kanda, T., Ishiguro, H., Ruckert, J. H., Severson, R. L., & Kane, S. K. 
(2008, March). Design patterns for sociality in human-robot interaction. In Proceedings 
of the 3rd ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (pp. 97-
104). ACM. doi:10.1145/1349822.1349836. 
Kahn Jr, P. H., Kanda, T., Ishiguro, H., Freier, N. G., Severson, R. L., Gill, B. T., Ruck, J. H., & 
Shen, S. (2012). “Robovie, you'll have to go into the closet now”: Children’s social and 
moral relationships with a humanoid robot. Developmental Psychology, 48(2), 303. 
doi:10.1037/a0027033. 
Kahn Jr, P. H., Kanda, T., Ishiguro, H., Gill, B. T., Ruckert, J. H., Shen, S., Gary, H. E.., 
Reichert, A. L., Freier, N. G., & Severson, R. L. (2012, March). Do people hold a 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
275 
humanoid robot morally accountable for the harm it causes?. In Proceedings of the 
seventh annual ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (pp. 
33-40). ACM. doi:10.1145/2157689.2157696. 
Kahn Jr, P. H., Kanda, T., Ishiguro, H., Gill, B. T., Shen, S., Ruckert, J. H., & Gary, H. E. (2016, 
March). Human creativity can be facilitated through interacting with a social robot. 
In The Eleventh ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human Robot Interaction (pp. 
173-180). IEEE Press. 
Kampylis, P. G., & Valtanen, J. (2010). Redefining creativity - Analyzing definitions, 
collocations, and consequences. The Journal of Creative Behavior, 44(3), 191-214. 
Kanda, T., Hirano, T., Eaton, D., & Ishiguro, H. (2004). Interactive robots as social partners and 
peer tutors for children: A field trial. Human–Computer Interaction, 19(1-2), 61-84. 
Kanda, T., Sato, R., Saiwaki, N., & Ishiguro, H. (2007). A two-month field trial in an elementary 
school for long-term human–robot interaction. IEEE Transactions on robotics, 23(5), 
962-971. doi:10.1109/TRO.2007.904904. 
Kaplan, F. (2005, October). Everyday robotics: robots as everyday objects. In Proceedings of the 
2005 Joint Conference on Smart Objects and Ambient Intelligence: Innovative Context-
aware Services: Usages and Technologies (pp. 59-64). ACM. 
doi:10.1145/1107548.1107570. 
*Kara, N., Aydin, C. C., & Cagiltay, K. (2013). Investigating the activities of children toward a 
smart storytelling toy. Journal of Educational Technology & Society, 16(1), 28-43. 
doi:10.1002/j.2162-6057.2010.tb01333.x 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
276 
Karau, S. J., & Hart, J. W. (1998). Group cohesiveness and social loafing: Effects of a social 
interaction manipulation on individual motivation within groups. Group Dynamics: 
Theory, Research, and Practice, 2(3), 185. doi:10.1037/1089-2699.2.3.185. 
Kaufman, J. (2018a). Finding meaning with creativity in the past, present, and future. 
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 13(6), 734-749. doi:10.1177/1745691618771981 
Kaufman, J. (2018b). Creativity as a stepping stone toward a brighter future. Journal of 
Intelligence, 6(2), 1-7. 
Kaufman, J. (2018c). Uniquely creative: Developing a new outline for positive outcomes. 
Creativity: Theories-Research-Applications, 5(2), 188-196. doi:10.1515/ctra-2018-0018. 
Kaufman, J. C., & Baer, J. (2005). Creativity Across Domains: Faces of the Muse. New Jersey, 
NY, USA: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Kaufman, J. C., & Beghetto, R. A. (2009). Beyond big and little: The four C model of creativity. 
Review of General Psychology, 13(1), 1-13. 
Kaufman, J. C., & Sternberg, R. J. (2010). The Cambridge Handbook of Creativity. New York, 
NY, US: Cambridge University Press. 
Keltner, D., & Ekman, P. (2015). The Science of ‘Inside Out’. New York Times, 3. 
Kemple, K. M., & Nissenberg, S. A. (2000). Nurturing creativity in early childhood education: 
Families are part of it. Early Childhood Education Journal, 28(1), 67-71. 
doi:10.1023/A:1009555805909. 
Kennedy, J., Baxter, P., & Belpaeme, T. (2015). Comparing robot embodiments in a guided 
discovery learning interaction with children. International Journal of Social Robotics, 
7(2), 293-308. doi:10.1007/s12369-014-0277-4. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
277 
Kim, K. H. (2005). Can only intelligent people be creative? A meta-analysis. Journal of 
Secondary Gifted Education, 16(2-3), 57-66. doi:10.4219/jsge-2005-473 
Kim, K. H. (2008). Meta-analyses of the relationship of creative achievement to both IQ and 
divergent thinking test scores. The Journal of Creative Behavior42(2), 106-130. 
doi:10.1002/j.2162-6057.2008.tb01290.x 
Kim, K. (2011). The creativity crisis: The decrease in creative thinking scores on the Torrance 
Tests of Creative Thinking. Creativity Research Journal, 23(4), 285-295. 
Knight, H. (2011, November). Eight lessons learned about non-verbal interactions through robot 
theater. In International Conference on Social Robotics (pp. 42-51). Springer, Berlin, 
Heidelberg. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-25504-5_5. 
Knight, H., & Simmons, R. (2016, May). Laban head-motions convey robot state: A call for 
robot body language. In 2016 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and 
Automation (ICRA) (pp. 2881-2888). IEEE. doi:10.1109/ICRA.2016.7487451. 
Koestner, R., Ryan, R. M., Bernieri, F., & Holt, K. (1984). Setting limits on children's behavior: 
The differential effects of controlling vs. informational styles on intrinsic motivation and 
creativity. Journal of personality, 52(3), 233-248. 
Kogan, N. (1973). Creativity and Cognitive Style: A Life-Span Perspective. In P. B. Baltes, & 
W. K. Schaie, Life-Span Developmental Psychology: Personality and Socialization. 
Cambridge, MA, US: Academic Press. 
Kohlberg, L. (1966). Moral education in the schools: A developmental view. The School Review, 
74(1), 1-30. 
Kokotsaki, D. (2016). Engagement and Creativity in Music Education. In Trends in Music 
Information Seeking, Behavior, and Retrieval for Creativity (pp. 295-309). IGI Global. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
278 
Kory-Westlund, J. M., & Breazeal, C. (2019). A long-term study of young children's rapport, 
social emulation, and language learning with a peer-like robot playmate in 
preschool. Frontiers in Robotics and AI, 6, 81. doi:10.3389/frobt.2019.00081. 
Kövecses, Z. (2010). Metaphor, creativity, and discourse. DELTA: Documentação de Estudos em 
Linguística Teórica e Aplicada, 26, 719-738. doi:10.1590/S0102-44502010000300016. 
Kozbelt, A., Beghetto, R. A., & Runco, M. (2010). Theories of creativity. In J. C. Kaufman, & R. 
J. Sternberg, The Cambridge Handbook of Creativity. New York, NY, US: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Kozima, H., Michalowski, M. P., & Nakagawa, C. (2009). Keepon. International Journal of 
Social Robotics, 1(1), 3-18. doi:10.1007/s12369-008-0009-8. 
Krafft, K. C., & Berk, L. E. (1998). Private speech in two preschools: Significance of open-
ended activities and make-believe play for verbal self-regulation. Early Childhood 
Research Quarterly, 13(4), 637-658. doi:10.1016/S0885-2006(99)80065-9. 
*Krampen, G. (1997). Promotion of creativity (divergent productions) and convergent 
productions by systematic-relaxation exercises: Empirical evidence from five 
experimental studies with children, young adults, and elderly. European Journal of 
Personality, 11(2), 83-99. doi:10.1002/(SICI)1099-0984(199706)11:2%3C83::AID-
PER280%3E3.0.CO;2-5. 
Krathwohl, D. R., & Anderson, L. W. (2009). A taxonomy for learning, teaching, and assessing: 
A revision of Bloom's taxonomy of educational objectives. Longman. 
Krippendorff, K., & Bock, M. A. (2009). The Content Analysis Reader. New Delhi, India: SAGE 
Publications. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
279 
Kuo, I. H., Jayawardena, C., Broadbent, E., & MacDonald, B. A. (2011). Multidisciplinary 
design approach for implementation of interactive services. International Journal of 
Social Robotics, 3(4), 443-456. doi:10.1007/s12369-011-0115-x. 
Landis, J. R., & Koch, G. G. (1977). The measurement of observer agreement for categorical 
data. Biometrics, 159-174. doi:10.2307/2529310. 
Landoni, M., Rubegni, E., Nicol, E., & Read, J. (2016, June). How many roles can children play? 
In Proceedings of the The 15th International Conference on Interaction Design and 
Children (pp. 720-725). ACM. doi:10.1145/2930674.2932222. 
Lee, K. Y. (2012). The study of factors in affecting the user's addictive behavior in using the 
smart phone applications. Korean Journal of Business Education, 27(5), 183-208. 
Lee, M. K., Forlizzi, J., Rybski, P. E., Crabbe, F., Chung, W., Finkle, J., Glaser, E., & Kiesler, S. 
(2009, March). The snackbot: documenting the design of a robot for long-term human-
robot interaction. In Proceedings of the 4th ACM/IEEE International Conference on 
Human Robot Interaction (pp. 7-14). ACM. doi:10.1145/1514095.1514100. 
Lee, K. M., Jung, Y., Kim, J., & Kim, S. R. (2006). Are physically embodied social agents better 
than disembodied social agents? The effects of physical embodiment, tactile interaction, 
and people's loneliness in human–robot interaction. International Journal of Human-
Computer Studies, 64(10), 962-973. doi:10.1016/j.ijhcs.2006.05.002. 
Leite, I., Martinho, C., & Paiva, A. (2013). Social robots for long-term interaction: a 
survey. International Journal of Social Robotics, 5(2), 291-308. doi:10.1007/s12369-013-
0178-y. 
Leite, I., Mascarenhas, S., Pereira, A., Martinho, C., Prada, R., & Paiva, A. (2010, September). 
“Why Can’t We Be Friends?” An Empathic Game Companion for Long-Term 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
280 
Interaction. In International Conference on Intelligent Virtual Agents (pp. 315-321). 
Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-15892-6_32. 
Lewis, T. (2009). Creativity in technology education: Providing children with glimpses of their 
inventive potential. International Journal of Technology and Design Education, 19(3), 
255-268. doi:10.1007/s10798-008-9051-y. 
Li, J. (2015). The benefit of being physically present: A survey of experimental works 
comparing copresent robots, telepresent robots and virtual agents. International Journal 
of Human-Computer Studies, 77, 23-37. doi:10.1016/j.ijhcs.2015.01.001. 
Liikanen, P. (1975). Increasing creativity through art education among pre-school children. 
Jyväskylä Studies in Education, Psychology & Social Research. 
Lillard, A. S., Lerner, M. D., Hopkins, E. J., Dore, R. A., Smith, E. D., & Palmquist, C. M. 
(2013). The impact of pretend play on children's development: A review of the 
evidence. Psychological bulletin, 139(1), 1. doi:10.1037/a0029321. 
Livingstone, S., Marsh, J., Plowman, L., Ottovordemgentschenfelde, S., & Fletcher-Watson, B. 
(2014). Young children (0-8) and digital technology: a qualitative exploratory study-
national report-UK. 
Löffler, D., Schmidt, N., & Tscharn, R. (2018, February). Multimodal expression of artificial 
emotion in social robots using color, motion and sound. In Proceedings of the 2018 
ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (pp. 334-343). ACM. 
doi:10.1145/3171221.3171261. 
Lohan, M., Aventin, Á., Maguire, L., Curran, R., McDowell, C., Agus, A., Donaldson, C., 
Clarke, M., Linden, M., Kelly, C., McDaid, L., Dunne, L., & O’Halloran, P. (2017). 
Recruitment, randomisation, allocation and retention. In Increasing boys’ and girls’ 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
281 
intentions to avoid teenage pregnancy: A cluster randomised controlled feasibility trial of 
an interactive video drama-based intervention in post-primary schools in Northern 
Ireland. NIHR Journals Library. 
Lotfi, A., Langensiepen, C., & Yahaya, S. (2018). Socially assistive robotics: Robot exercise 
trainer for older adults. Technologies, 6(1), 32. doi:10.3390/technologies6010032. 
Lubart, T. I. (2001). Models of the creative process: Past, present and future. Creativity Research 
Journal, 13(3-4), 295-308. 
Lubart, T. (2005). How can computers be partners in the creative process: classification and 
commentary on the special issue. International Journal of Human-Computer 
Studies, 63(4-5), 365-369. Doi: 10.1016/j.ijhcs.2005.04.002 
Lubart, T. I., & Getz, I. (1997). Emotion, metaphor, and the creative process. Creativity Research 
Journal, 10(4), 285-301. doi:10.1207/s15326934crj1004_1. 
Lubart, T. I., & Guignard, J. H. (2004). The generality-specificity of creativity: A multivariate 
approach. In Sternberg, R. J., Singer, J. L., & Grigorenko, E. L., Creativity: From 
Potential to Realization (pp. 43-56). Washington, DC, USA: American Psychological 
Association. 
Lubart, T., Mouchiroud, C., Tordjman, S., & Zenasn, F. (2015). Psychologie de la créativité 
(Vol. 2). Paris: Armand Colin. 
Lucas, P., & Martinho, C. (2017). Stay Awhile and Listen to 3Buddy, a Co-creative Level 
Design Support Tool. In International Conference of Computational Creativity (pp. 205-
212). 
*Luftig, R. L. (2000). An investigation of an arts infusion program on creative thinking, 
academic achievement, affective functioning, and arts appreciation of children at three 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
282 
grade levels. Studies in Art Education, 41(3), 208-227. 
doi:10.1080/00393541.2000.11651678. 
Lungarella, M., & Metta, G. (2003). Beyond gazing, pointing, and reaching: A survey of 
developmental robotics. 
Lungarella, M., Metta, G., Pfeifer, R., & Sandini, G. (2003). Developmental robotics: a survey. 
Connection science, 15(4), 151-190. doi:10.1080/09540090310001655110. 
Lupetti, M. L. (2017). Shybo - Design of a research artefact for human-robot interaction 
studies. Journal of Science and Technology of the Arts, 9(1), 57-69. 
doi:10.7559/citarj.v9i1.303. 
Lupetti, M., Yao, Y., Mi, H., & Germak, C. (2017). Design for children’s playful learning with 
robots. Future Internet, 9(3), 52. doi:10.3390/fi9030052. 
Luria, M., Hoffman, G., Megidish, B., Zuckerman, O., & Park, S. (2016, August). Designing 
Vyo, a robotic Smart Home assistant: Bridging the gap between device and social agent. 
In 2016 25th IEEE International Symposium on Robot and Human Interactive 
Communication (RO-MAN) (pp. 1019-1025). IEEE. 
doi:10.1109/ROMAN.2016.7745234. 
Luria, M., Zimmerman, J., & Forlizzi, J. (2019). Championing Research through design in 
HRI. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.07572. 
Ma, H. H. (2009). The effect size of variables associated with creativity: A meta-analysis. 
Creativity Research Journal, 21(1), 30-42. 
*MacDonald, W. S., Heinberg, P., Fruehling, R. T., & Meredith, C. G. (1976). Training of 
original responses and academic performance of fifth-grade students. Psychological 
Reports, 38(1), 67-72. doi:10.2466/pr0.1976.38.1.67. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
283 
Maćkiewicz, M., & Cieciuch, J. (2016). Pictorial Personality Traits Questionnaire for Children 
(PPTQ-C)—A New Measure of Children's Personality Traits. Frontiers in psychology, 7, 
498. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00498. 
Magnenat, S., Riedo, F., Bonani, M., & Mondada, F. (2012, May). A programming workshop 
using the robot “Thymio II”: The effect on the understanding by children. In 2012 IEEE 
Workshop on Advanced Robotics and its Social Impacts (ARSO) (pp. 24-29). IEEE. 
doi:10.1109/ARSO.2012.6213393. 
Magnusson, T. (2011). Algorithms as scores: Coding live music. Leonardo Music Journal, 19-
23. doi:10.1162/LMJ_a_00056. 
Maier, N. R. (1970). Problem Solving and Creativity; In Individuals and Groups. Brooks/Cole 
Pub. Co. 
*Majid, D. A., Tan, A. G., & Soh, K. C. (2003). Enhancing children’s creativity: An exploratory 
study on using the Internet and SCAMPER as creative writing tools. Korean Journal of 
Thinking and Problem Solving, 13(2), 67-82. 
*Maker, C. J., Jo, S., & Muammar, O. M. (2008). Development of creativity: The influence of 
varying levels of implementation of the DISCOVER curriculum model, a non-traditional 
pedagogical approach. Learning and Individual Differences, 18(4), 402-417. 
doi:10.1016/j.lindif.2008.03.003. 
Mansfield, R. S., Busse, T. V., & Krepelka, E. J. (1978). The effectiveness of creativity training. 
Review of Educational Research, 48(4), 517-536. 
Martelaro, N. (2016, March). Wizard-of-oz interfaces as a step towards autonomous HRI. 
In 2016 AAAI Spring Symposium Series. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
284 
Martelaro, N., & Ju, W. (2017, February). WoZ Way: Enabling real-time remote interaction 
prototyping & observation in on-road vehicles. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM 
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing (pp. 169-
182). ACM. 
Martelaro, N., & Ju, W. (2019). The needfinding machine. In Social internet of things (pp. 51-
84). Springer, Cham. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-94659-7_4. 
Martin, L. (2015). The promise of the maker movement for education. Journal of Pre-College 
Engineering Education Research (J-PEER), 5(1), 4. doi:10.7771/2157-9288.1099. 
Martin, A. (2005b). DigEuLit – A European framework for digital literacy: A progress report. 
Journal of eLiteracy, 2(2), 130-136 
Mast, M., Burmester, M., Krüger, K., Fatikow, S., Arbeiter, G., Graf, B., Kronreif, G., Pigini, L., 
Facal, D., & Qiu, R. (2012). User-centered design of a dynamic-autonomy remote 
interaction concept for manipulation-capable robots to assist elderly people in the 
home. Journal of Human-Robot Interaction, 1(1), 96-118. doi:10.5898/JHRI.1.1.Mast. 
Mataric, M. J., Koenig, N. P., & Feil-Seifer, D. (2007, March). Materials for Enabling Hands-On 
Robotics and STEM Education. In AAAI spring symposium: Semantic scientific 
knowledge integration (pp. 99-102). 
Mavridis, N. (2015). A review of verbal and non-verbal human–robot interactive 
communication. Robotics and Autonomous Systems, 63, 22-35. 
doi:10.1016/j.robot.2014.09.031. 
Mayer, R. E. (1999). Fifty years of creativity research. In R. K. Sternberg, Handbook of 
Creativity. New York, NY, US: Cambridge University Press. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
285 
Mayo, J. A. (2002). Case-based instruction: A technique for increasing conceptual application in 
introductory psychology. Journal of Constructivist Psychology, 15(1), 65-74. 
doi:10.1080/107205302753305728. 
McAuley, E., Duncan, T., & Tammen, V. V. (1989). Psychometric properties of the Intrinsic 
Motivation Inventory in a competitive sport setting: A confirmatory factor analysis. 
Research quarterly for exercise and sport, 60(1), 48-58. 
doi:10.1080/02701367.1989.10607413. 
McCarney, R., Warner, J., Iliffe, S., Van Haselen, R., Griffin, M., & Fisher, P. (2007). The 
Hawthorne Effect: A randomised, controlled trial. BMC Medical Research Methodology, 
7(1), 30(38). doi:10.1186/1471-2288-7-30. 
McCrae, R. R., & Costa Jr, P. T. (1997). Personality trait structure as a human universal. 
American Psychologist, 52(5), 509. doi:10.1037/0003-066X.52.5.509. 
McHugh, M. L. (2012). Interrater reliability: The kappa statistic. Biochemia Medica: Biochemia 
Medica, 22(3), 276-282. 
McKenney, S., & Voogt, J. (2010). Technology and young children: How 4-7 year olds perceive 
their own use of computers. Computers in Human Behavior, 26(4), 656-664. 
doi:10.1016/j.chb.2010.01.002. 
*Meador, K. S. (1995). The effect of synectics training on gifted and nongifted kindergarten 
students. Journal for the Education of the Gifted, 18(1), 55-73. 
doi:10.1177/016235329401800105. 
Mellander, C., & Florida, R. (2013). The Creative Class Goes Global. Oxfordshire, UK. 
Mellou, E. (1996). Can creativity be nurtured in young children? Early Child Development and 
Care, 119(1), 119-130. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
286 
Melonio, A., & Gennari, R. (2012). Co-Design with children: The State of the Art. Technical 
report, KRDB Research Centre Technical Report. 
Meriçli, Ç., Veloso, M., & Akın, H. L. (2011). Task refinement for autonomous robots using 
complementary corrective human feedback. International Journal of Advanced Robotic 
Systems, 8(2), 16. doi:10.5772/10575. 
Michinov, N., & Primois, C. (2005). Improving productivity and creativity in online groups 
through social comparison process: New evidence for asynchronous electronic 
brainstorming. Computers in Human Behavior, 21(1), 11-28. 
doi:10.1016/j.chb.2004.02.004. 
Miller, B, & Gerard, D. (1979). Family influences on the development of creativity in children: 
An integrative review. Family Coordinator, 28(3), 295-312. doi:10.2307/581942 
Miller, D. L. (2015). Cultivating creativity. The English Journal, 104(6), 25-30. 
Mnich, C., Weyland, S., Jekauc, D., & Schipperijn, J. (2019). Psychosocial and Physiological 
Health Outcomes of Green Exercise in Children and Adolescents—A Systematic 
Review. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 16(21), 
4266. doi:10.3390/ijerph16214266. 
Moher, D., Shamseer, L., Clarke, M., Ghersi, D., Liberati, A., Petticrew, M., Shekelle, P., & 
Stewart, L. A. (2015). Preferred reporting items for systematic review and meta-analysis 
protocols (PRISMA-P) 2015 statement. Systematic reviews, 4(1), 1-9. doi: 10.1186/2046-
4053-4-1. 
Montessori, M. (1917). The Advanced Montessori Method. (Vol. 1). Frederick A. Stokes 
Company. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
287 
Moore, D., Tennent, H., Martelaro, N., & Ju, W. (2017, March). Making noise intentional: A 
study of servo sound perception. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM/IEEE International 
Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (pp. 12-21). ACM. 
doi:10.1145/2909824.3020238. 
Moore, G. T., & Cohen, U. (1978). Exceptional Education and the Physical Environment: 
Toward Behaviorally-Based Design Principles. 
*Moore, M., & Russ, S. W. (2008). Follow-up of a pretend play intervention: Effects on play, 
creativity, and emotional processes in children. Creativity Research Journal, 20(4), 427-
436. doi:10.1080/10400410802391892. 
Moraveji, N., Li, J., Ding, J., O'Kelley, P., & Woolf, S. (2007, April). Comicboarding: using 
comics as proxies for participatory design with children. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 1371-1374). ACM. 
doi:10.1145/1240624.1240832. 
*Moreno, J. M., & Hogan, J. D. (1976). The influence of race and social-class level on the 
training of creative thinking and problem-solving abilities. The Journal of Educational 
Research, 70(2), 91-95. doi:10.1080/00220671.1976.10884960. 
Moran, S. (2010). The roles of creativity in society. In J. C. Kaufman, & R. J. Sternberg, The 
Cambridge Handbook of Creativity (pp. 74-90). New York, NY, US: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Mordoch, E., Osterreicher, A., Guse, L., Roger, K., & Thompson, G. (2013). Use of social 
commitment robots in the care of elderly people with dementia: A literature review. 
Maturitas, 74(1), 14-20. doi:10.1016/j.maturitas.2012.10.015. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
288 
Mordvintsev, A., Olah, C., & Tyka, M. (2015a). Deep dream: A code example for visualizing 
neural networks. Google Research, 2(5). 
Mordvintsev, A., Olah, C., & Tyka, M. (2015b). Inceptionism: Going deeper into neural 
networks, 2015. Retrieved 11 2019, from Google AI 2005: https://research. googleblog. 
com/2015/06/inceptionism-going-deeper-into-neural.html. 
Mori, M. (1970). On the uncanny valley. Energy, 7(4), 33-35. 
Morse. J. M. (1995). The significance of saturation. Qualitative Health Research, 5(2), 147-149. 
Mota, C. (2011, November). The rise of personal fabrication. In Proceedings of the 8th ACM 
conference on Creativity and cognition (pp. 279-288). ACM. 
doi:10.1145/2069618.2069665. 
Mottweiler, C. M., & Taylor, M. (2014). Elaborated role play and creativity in preschool age 
children. Psychology of Aesthetics, Creativity, and the Arts, 8(3), 277. 
Moura, L. (2007). A new kind of art: The robotic action painter. X Generative Art Conferece, 
Politecnico di Milano University. 
Moura, L. (2018, September). Robot Art: An Interview with Leonel Moura. In Arts (Vol. 7, No. 
3, p. 28). Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute. 
Moreau, C. P., & Engeset, M. G. (2016). The downstream consequences of problem-solving 
mindsets: How playing with LEGO influences creativity. Journal of Marketing Research, 
53(1), 18-30. 
Mubin, O., Stevens, C. J., Shahid, S., Al Mahmud, A., & Dong, J. J. (2013). A review of the 
applicability of robots in education. Journal of Technology in Education and 
Learning, 1(209-0015), 13. doi:10.2316/Journal.209.2013.1.209-0015. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
289 
Mumford, M. D. (2003). Where have we been, where are we going? Taking stock in creativity 
research. Creativity Research Journal, 15(2-3), 107-120. 
doi:10.1080/10400419.2003.9651403. 
Mumm, J., & Mutlu, B. (2011). Designing motivational agents: The role of praise, social 
comparison, and embodiment in computer feedback. Computers in Human Behavior, 
27(5), 1643-1650. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2011.02.002. 
Murphy, R. R., Nomura, T., Billard, A., & Burke, J. L. (2010). Human-Robot Interaction. IEEE 
Robotics & Automation Magazine, 17(2), 85-89. doi:10.1109/MRA.2010.936953. 
Mutlu, B., & Forlizzi, J. (2008, March). Robots in organizations: the role of workflow, social, 
and environmental factors in human-robot interaction. In Proceedings of the 3rd 
ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human Robot Interaction (pp. 287-294). ACM. 
doi:10.1145/1349822.1349860. 
Nash, W. R. (1974). The effects of a school for the gifted in averting the fourth grade slump in 
creativity. Gifted Child Quarterly, 18(3), 168-170. 
Nass, C., Steuer, J., & Tauber, E. R. (1994, April). Computers are social actors. In Proceedings 
of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 72-78). ACM. 
*Nelson, A., & Lalemi, B. (1991). The role of imagery training on Tohono O'odham children's 
creativity scores. Journal of American Indian Education, 30(3), 24-32. 
Netting, R. M. (1986). Cultural ecology (No. 304.2 N47). 
Nemeth, C., Brown, K., & Rogers, J. (2001). Devil’s advocate versus authentic dissent: 
Stimulating quantity and quality. European Journal of Social Psychology, 31(6), 707-
720. doi:10.1002/ejsp.58. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
290 
Newton-Dunn, H., Nakano, H., & Gibson, J. (2003, May). Block jam: a tangible interface for 
interactive music. In Proceedings of the 2003 conference on New interfaces for musical 
expression (pp. 170-177). National University of Singapore. 
Nickerson, R. S. (1999). Enhancing creativity. In R. J. Sternberg, Handbook of Creativity. 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Nijdam, N. A. (2009). Mapping emotion to color. Book Mapping Emotion to Color, 2-9. 
Nogueira, S. I., Almeida, L. S., & Lima, T. S. (2017a). Two Tracks of Thought: A Structural 
Model of the Test for Creative Thinking-Drawing Production (TCT-DP). Creativity 
Research Journal, 29(2), 206-211. doi:10.1080/10400419.2017.1303312. 
Nogueira, S. I., Almeida, L. S., & Lima, T. S. (2017b, July). In the path of Two Tracks of 
Thought: A Structural Model of the Test for Creative Thinking Drawing Production 
(TCT-DP), over the School Years in Portuguese Context. Poster presented at 
the16th International Centre for Innovation in Education Conference (ICIE) on: 
Excellence, Innovation, & Creativity in Basic-Higher Education & Psychology, Paris, 
France. 
Nogueira, S. I., Almeida, L. S., & Lima, T. S. (2017c, July). Normative values for the Test for 
Creative Thinking-Drawing Production (TCT-DP), over the school years in Portuguese 
context. Poster presented at the16th International Centre for Innovation in Education 
Conference (ICIE) on: Excellence, Innovation, & Creativity in Basic-Higher Education & 
Psychology, Paris, France. 
Norman, D. (1986). Cognitive engineering. User Centered System Design, 31, 61. Encyclopedia 
of GIS. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-17885-1_100154. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
291 
Norman, D. (2013). The design of everyday things: Revised and expanded edition. New York, 
NY, US: Basic Books. 
Nesset, V., & Large, A. (2004). Children in the information technology design process: A review 
of theories and their applications. Library & Information Science Research, 26(2), 140-
161. doi:10.1016/j.lisr.2003.12.002. 
Obaid, M., Barendregt, W., Alves-Oliveira, P., Paiva, A., & Fjeld, M. (2015, October). 
Designing robotic teaching assistants: interaction design students’ and children’s views. 
In International conference on social robotics (pp. 502-511). Springer, Cham. 
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-25554-5_50. 
Oden, S., & Asher, S. R. (1977). Coaching children in social skills for friendship making. Child 
Development, 48(2), 495-506. doi:10.2307/1128645. 
Oliveira, H. (2009). Automatic generation of poetry: an overview. Universidade de Coimbra. 
Oliveira, H. G., & Cardoso, A. (2015). Poetry generation with PoeTryMe. In Computational 
Creativity Research: Towards Creative Machines (pp. 243-266). Atlantis Press, Paris. 
doi:10.2991/978-94-6239-085-0_12. 
Ortlieb, E. T. (2010). The Pursuit of Play within the Curriculum. Journal of Instructional 
Psychology, 37(3). 
Osborn, A. F. (1953). Applied imagination. Oxford, England: Scribner’S. 
Osburn, H. K., & Mumford, M. D. (2006). Creativity and planning: Training interventions to 
develop creative problem-solving skills. Creativity Research Journal, 18(2), 173-190. 
doi:10.1207/s15326934crj1802_4. 
Özgür, A. (2018). Cellulo: Tangible Haptic Swarm Robots for Learning (Doctoral dissertation, 
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne). 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
292 
Özgür, A., Lemaignan, S., Johal, W., Beltran, M., Briod, M., Pereyre, L., Mondada F., & 
Dillenbourg, P. (2017, March). Cellulo: Versatile handheld robots for education. In 2017 
12th ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI (pp. 119-
127). IEEE. 
*Pagona, B., & Costas, M. (2008). The development of motor creativity in elementary school 
children and its retention. Creativity Research Journal, 20(1), 72-80. 
doi:10.1080/10400410701842078. 
Paiva, A., Leite, I., Boukricha, H., & Wachsmuth, I. (2017). Empathy in virtual agents and 
robots: A survey. ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems (TiiS), 7(3), 11. 
doi:10.1145/2912150. 
Paiva, A., Mascarenhas, S., Petisca, S., Correia, F., & Alves-Oliveira, P. (2018). Towards more 
humane machines: Creating emotional social robots. In New interdisciplinary landscapes 
in morality and emotion (pp. 125-139). London, UK: Routledge. 
Palmiero, M., Di Giacomo, D., & Passafiume, D. (2014). Divergent thinking and age-related 
changes. Creativity Research Journal, 26(4), 456-460. 
doi:10.1080/10400419.2014.961786. 
Pantofaru, C., & Takayama, L. (2011). Need finding: A tool for directing robotics research and 
development. In RSS 2011 Workshop on perspectives and contributions to robotics from 
the human sciences. 
Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, computers, and powerful ideas. New York, NY, US: 
Basic Books, Inc. 
Papert, S. (1999). What is Logo? Who needs it. Logo philosophy and implementation. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
293 
Patnaik, D., & Becker, R. (1999). Needfinding: The why and how of uncovering people's 
needs. Design Management Journal (Former Series), 10(2), 37-43. doi:10.1111/j.1948-
7169.1999.tb00250.x. 
Park, H. W., Rosenberg-Kima, R., Rosenberg, M., Gordon, G., & Breazeal, C. (2017, March). 
Growing growth mindset with a social robot peer. In 2017 12th ACM/IEEE International 
Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI (pp. 137-145). IEEE. 
doi:10.1145/2909824.3020213. 
Parkhurst, H. B. (1999). Confusion, lack of consensus, and the definition of creativity as a 
construct. The Journal of Creative Behavior, 33(1), 1-21. 
Paulus, P. B., & Nijstad, B. A. (2003). Group Creativity: Innovation Through Collaboration. 
New York, NY, USA: Oxford University Press. 
Pellegrini, A. D., & Bohn, C. M. (2005). The role of recess in children’s cognitive performance 
and school adjustment. Educational Researcher, 34(1), 13-19. 
doi:10.3102/0013189X034001013. 
Pellegrini, A. D., & Smith, P. K. (1998). Physical activity play: The nature and function of a 
neglected aspect of play. Child Development, 69(3), 577-598. doi:10.1111/j.1467-
8624.1998.tb06226.x. 
Pellis, S., & Pellis, V. (2013). The playful brain: venturing to the limits of neuroscience. London, 
UK: Oneworld Publications. 
Pennisi, P., Tonacci, A., Tartarisco, G., Billeci, L., Ruta, L., Gangemi, S., & Pioggia, G. (2016). 
Autism and social robotics: A systematic review. Autism Research, 9(2), 165-183. 
doi:10.1002/aur.1527. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
294 
Peppler, K., & Bender, S. (2013). Maker movement spreads innovation one project at a time. Phi 
Delta Kappan, 95(3), 22-27. doi:10.1177/003172171309500306. 
Phon, D. N. E., Ali, M. B., & Halim, N. D. A. (2014, April). Collaborative augmented reality in 
education: A review. In 2014 International Conference on Teaching and Learning in 
Computing and Engineering (pp. 78-83). IEEE. doi:10.1109/LaTiCE.2014.23. 
Piaget, J. (1950). The Psychology of Intelligence. London, UK: Routledge. 
Piaget, J. (1959). The Language and Thought of the Child. London, UK: Routledge Classics. 
Piaget, J. (1971). The theory of stages in cognitive development. In D. R. Green, M. P. Ford, & 
G. Flamer, Measurements and Piaget. New York, NY, US: McGraw-Hill. 
Piaget, J. (2013). Play, dreams and imitation in childhood. Routledge. 
Piaget, J., & Cook, M. (1952). The Origins of Intelligence in Children. New York, NY, US: 
International Universities Press. 
Pink, D. H., & Unwin, A. (2005). Why right-brainers will rule the future. In A whole new mind: 
Moving from the information age to the conceptual age. New York, NY, US. 
Pires, A., Alves-Oliveira, P., Arriaga, P., & Martinho, C. (2017, August). CUBUS: Autonomous 
embodied characters to stimulate creative idea generation in groups of children. Paper 
presented at the 17th International Conference on Intelligent Virtual Agents, 360-373, 
Stockholm, Sweden. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-67401-8_46. 
Pfeifer, R., & Scheier, C. (2001). Understanding Intelligence. MIT press. 
Plowman, L., & McPake, J. (2013). Seven myths about young children and 
technology. Childhood Education, 89(1), 27-33. doi:10.1080/00094056.2013.757490. 
Plucker, J. A., & Beghetto, R. A. (2004). Why creativity is domain general, why it looks domain 
specific, and why the distinction does not matter. In Sternberg, R. J., Grigorenko, E. L., 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
295 
& Singer, J. L., Creativity: From Potential to Realization (pp. 153-167). Washington, 
DC, USA: American Psychological Association. 
Plucker, J. A., Beghetto, R. A., & Dow, G. T. (2004). Why isn't creativity more important to 
educational psychologists? Potentials, pitfalls, and future directions in creativity research. 
Educational Psychologist, 39(2), 83-96. 
Poole, D. A., & Lamb, M. E. (1998). Investigative interviews of children: A guide for helping 
professionals. American Psychological Association. 
Powers, A., Kiesler, S., Fussell, S., & Torrey, C. (2007, March). Comparing a computer agent 
with a humanoid robot. In 2nd ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot 
Interaction (HRI) (pp. 145-152). IEEE. doi:10.1145/1228716.1228736. 
Puryear, J. S., Kettler, T., & Rinn, A. N. (2017). Relationships of personality to differential 
conceptions of creativity: A systematic review. Psychology of Aesthetics, Creativity, and 
the Arts, 11(1), 59. doi:10.1037/aca0000079. 
Rabbitt, S. M., Kazdin, A. E., & Scassellati, B. (2015). Integrating socially assistive robotics into 
mental healthcare interventions: Applications and recommendations for expanded 
use. Clinical Psychology Review, 35, 35-46. doi:10.1016/j.cpr.2014.07.001. 
Radu, I. (2014). Augmented reality in education: A meta-review and cross-media 
analysis. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, 18(6), 1533-1543. doi:10.1007/s00779-
013-0747-y. 
Raffle, H. S., Parkes, A. J., & Ishii, H. (2004, April). Topobo: a constructive assembly system 
with kinetic memory. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in 
computing systems (pp. 647-654). ACM. doi:10.1145/985692.985774. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
296 
Raina, N. T. (1982). Sex differences in creativity in India: A second look. Indian Educational 
Review, 17(3), 122-128. 
Ramesh, G., & Devadasan, S. R. (2007). Literature review on the agile manufacturing criteria. 
Journal of Manufacturing Technology Management, 18(2), 182-201. 
Read, J. C. (2008). Validating the Fun Toolkit: an instrument for measuring children’s opinions 
of technology. Cognition, Technology & Work, 10(2), 119-128. doi:10.1007/s10111-007-
0069-9. 
Read, J. C., Horton, M., Sim, G., Gregory, P., Fitton, D., & Cassidy, B. (2013, April). CHECk: a 
tool to inform and encourage ethical practice in participatory design with children. 
In CHI'13 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 187-192). 
ACM. doi:10.1145/2468356.2468391. 
Reeves, B., & Nass, C. (1996). How people treat computers, television, and new media like real 
people and places. 
Rejskind, F. G. (1982). Autonomy and creativity in children. The Journal of Creative Behavior, 
16(1), 58-67. doi:10.1002/j.2162-6057.1982.tb00322.x. 
Resnick, M. (1998). Technologies for lifelong kindergarten. Educational Technology Research 
and Development, 46(4), 43-55. doi:10.1007/BF02299672. 
Resnick, M., Maloney, J., Monroy-Hernández, A., Rusk, N., Eastmond, E., Brennan, K., Millner, 
A., Rosenbaum, E., Silver, J., Silverman, B., & Kafai, Y. B. (2009). Scratch: 
Programming for all. Communinations of the Acm, 52(11), 60-67. 
doi:10.1145/1592761.1592779. 
Resnick, M., Martin, F., Berg, R., Borovoy, R., Colella, V., Kramer, K., & Silverman, B. (1998, 
January). Digital manipulatives: new toys to think with. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
297 
conference on Human factors in computing systems (pp. 281-287). ACM Press/Addison-
Wesley Publishing Co. 
Resnick, M., Martin, F., Sargent, R., & Silverman, B. (1996). Programmable bricks: Toys to 
think with. IBM Systems Journal, 35(3.4), 443-452. doi:10.1147/sj.353.0443. 
Resnick, M., & Robinson, K. (2017). Lifelong kindergarten: Cultivating creativity through 
projects, passion, peers, and play. MIT press. 
Resnick, M., & Silverman, B. (2005, June). Some reflections on designing construction kits for 
kids. In Proceedings of the 2005 Conference on Interaction Design and Children (pp. 
117-122). ACM. doi:10.1145/1109540.1109556. 
Rhodes, M. (1961). An analysis of creativity. The Phi Delta Kappan, 42(7), 305-310. 
Ribeiro, T., & Paiva, A. (2012, March). The illusion of robotic life: principles and practices of 
animation for robots. In 2012 7th ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot 
Interaction (HRI) (pp. 383-390). IEEE. doi:10.1145/2157689.2157814. 
Richardson, J. T. (2011). Eta squared and partial eta squared as measures of effect size in 
educational research. Educational Research Review, 6(2), 135-147. 
doi:10.1016/j.edurev.2010.12.001. 
Rickards, T. (1974). Problem-solving through creative analysis. Epping, England: Gower Press. 
Riek, L. D. (2012). Wizard of oz studies in HRI: A systematic review and new reporting 
guidelines. Journal of Human-Robot Interaction, 1(1), 119-136. 
doi:10.5898/JHRI.1.1.Riek. 
Rietzschel, E. F., Nijstad, B. A., & Stroebe, W. (2010). The selection of creative ideas after 
individual idea generation: Choosing between creativity and impact. British Journal of 
Psychology, 101(1), 47-68. doi:10.1348/000712609X414204. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
298 
Rietzschel, E. F., Slijkhuis, J. M., & Van Yperen, N. W. (2014). Task structure, need for 
structure, and creativity. European Journal of Social Psychology, 44(4), 386-399. 
doi:10.1002/ejsp.2024. 
Ritter, S. M., & Ferguson, S. (2017). Happy creativity: Listening to happy music facilitates 
divergent thinking. PloS one, 12(9), e0182210. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0182210. 
Robert, L. (2018, December). Personality in the human robot interaction literature: A review and 
brief critique. In Robert, LP (2018). Personality in the Human Robot Interaction 
Literature: A Review and Brief Critique, Proceedings of the 24th Americas Conference 
on Information Systems, Aug (pp. 16-18). 
Robert, D., & Breazeal, C. (2012, March). Blended reality characters. In Proceedings of the 
seventh annual ACM/IEEE international conference on Human-Robot Interaction (pp. 
359-366). ACM. doi:10.1145/2157689.2157810. 
Roberts, B. W., & Mroczek, D. (2008). Personality trait change in adulthood. Current directions 
in psychological science, 17(1), 31-35. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8721.2008.00543.x. 
Robins, B., Dautenhahn, K., Ferrari, E., Kronreif, G., Prazak-Aram, B., Marti, P., Iacono, I., 
Gelderblom, G. J., Bernd, T., Caprino, F., & Laudanna, E. (2012). Scenarios of robot-
assisted play for children with cognitive and physical disabilities. Interaction 
Studies, 13(2), 189-234. doi:10.1075/is.13.2.03rob. 
Robins, B., Ferrari, E., Dautenhahn, K., Kronreif, G., Prazak-Aram, B., Gelderblom, G. J., Tanja, 
B., Caprino, B., Laudanna, E., & Marti, P. (2010). Human-centred design methods: 
Developing scenarios for robot assisted play informed by user panels and field 
trials. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 68(12), 873-898. 
doi:10.1016/j.ijhcs.2010.08.001. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
299 
Robinson, K. (2011). Out of our minds: Learning to be creative. Mankato, MN, USA: Capstone. 
Ros, R., & Demiris, Y. (2013, October). Creative dance: An approach for social interaction 
between robots and children. In International Workshop on Human Behavior 
Understanding (pp. 40-51). Springer, Cham. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-02714-2_4. 
Rose, L. H., & Lin, H.-T. (1984). A meta-analysis of long-term creativity training programs. The 
Journal of Creative Behavior, 18(1), 11-22. 
Rosenthal, R. (1979). The file drawer problem and tolerance for null result. Psychological 
Bulletin, 86(3), 638-641. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.86.3.638. 
Roskos-Ewoldson, B., Intons-Peterson, M. J., & Anderson, R. E. (1993). Imagery, creativity, and 
discovery: Conclusions and implications. Advances in Psychology, 93, 313-328. 
doi:10.1016/S0166-4115(08)60147-8. 
Ross, D. S. (2010). Improv ed: Changing thoughts about learning (Doctoral dissertation). 
Available from ProQuest Dissertations and Theses database. (UMI No. 3415717). 
Rossi, S., Ferland, F., & Tapus, A. (2017). User profiling and behavioral adaptation for HRI: a 
survey. Pattern Recognition Letters, 99, 3-12. doi:10.1016/j.patrec.2017.06.002. 
Rubin, K. H., & Howe, N. (1985). Toys and play behaviors: An overview. Topics in Early 
Childhood Special Education, 5(3), 1-9. doi:10.1177/027112148500500302. 
Roussou, M. (2004). Learning by doing and learning through play: an exploration of interactivity 
in virtual environments for children. Computers in Entertainment (CIE), 2(1), 10-10. 
doi:10.1145/973801.973818. 
Ryokai, K., Vaucelle, C., & Cassell, J. (2003). Virtual peers as partners in storytelling and 
literacy learning. Journal of computer assisted learning, 19(2), 195-208. 
doi:10.1046/j.0266-4909.2003.00020.x. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
300 
Ruiz-del-Solar, J. (2009). Robotics-centered outreach activities: An integrated approach. IEEE 
Transactions on Education, 53(1), 38-45. doi:10.1109/TE.2009.2022946. 
Runco, M. A. (1999). Fourth grade slump. In M. A. Runco, & S. R. Pritzker, Encyclopedia of 
Creativity (pp. 743-744). San Diego, CA, US: Academic Press. 
Runco, M. A., Acar, S., & Cayirdag, N. (2017). A closer look at the creativity gap and why 
students are less creative at school than outside of school. Thinking Skills and Creativity, 
24, 242-249. 
Runco, M. A., & Cayirdag, N. (2006). The development of children's creativity. In O. N. 
Saracho, & B. Spodek, Handbook of Research on the Education of Young Children (Vol. 
2, pp. 102-110). New York, NY, US: Routledge: Taylor & Francis Group. 
Runco, M. A., & Charles, R. E. (1993). Judgments of originality and appropriateness as 
predictors of creativity. Personality and Individual Differences, 15(5), 537-546. 
Runco, M. A., & Laeger, G. J. (2012). The standard definition of creativity. Creativity Research 
Journal, 24(1), 92-96. 
Runco, M. A., & Pritzker, S. (1999). Encyclopedia of creativity (Vol. 2). San Diego, CA, US: 
Academic Press. 
Runco, M. A., Nemiro, J., & Walberg, H. (1998). Personal explicit theories of creativity. The 
Journal of Creative Behavior, 32(2), 1-17. 
Russ, S. W. (2016). Pretend play: Antecedent of adult creativity. New Directions for Child and 
Adolescent Development, 151, 21-32. doi:10.1002/cad.20154. 
Russ, S. W., Robins, A. L., & Christiano, B. A. (1999). Pretend play: Longitudinal prediction of 
creativity and affect in fantasy in children. Creativity Research Journal, 12(2), 129-139. 
doi:10.1207/s15326934crj1202_5. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
301 
Rybski, P. E., Yoon, K., Stolarz, J., & Veloso, M. M. (2007, March). Interactive robot task 
training through dialog and demonstration. In Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE 
international conference on Human-robot interaction (pp. 49-56). ACM. 
doi:10.1145/1228716.1228724. 
Šabanović, S. (2010). Robots in society, society in robots. International Journal of Social 
Robotics, 2(4), 439-450. doi:10.1007/s12369-010-0066-7. 
Šabanović, S., Reeder, S. M., & Kechavarzi, B. (2014). Designing robots in the wild: In situ 
prototype evaluation for a break management robot. Journal of Human-Robot 
Interaction, 3(1), 70-88. doi:10.5898/JHRI.3.1.Sabanovic. 
Said-Metwaly, S., Van den Noortgate, W., & Kyndt, E. (2017). Approaches to measuring 
creativity: A systematic literature review. Creativity: Theories-Research-Applications, 
4(2), 238-275. doi:10.1515/ctra-2017-0013. 
Salem, M., Eyssel, F., Rohlfing, K., Kopp, S., & Joublin, F. (2013). To err is human (-like): 
Effects of robot gesture on perceived anthropomorphism and likability. International 
Journal of Social Robotics, 5(3), 313-323. doi:10.1007/s12369-013-0196-9. 
Salem, M., Kopp, S., Wachsmuth, I., Rohlfing, K., & Joublin, F. (2012). Generation and 
evaluation of communicative robot gesture. International Journal of Social 
Robotics, 4(2), 201-217. doi:10.1007/s12369-011-0124-9. 
Salonius-Pasternak, D. E., & Gelfond, H. S. (2005). The next level of research on electronic 
play: Potential benefits and contextual influences for children and adolescents. Human 
Technology: An Interdisciplinary Journal on Humans in ICT Environments. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
302 
Salvini, P., Laschi, C., & Dario, P. (2010). Design for acceptability: improving robots’ 
coexistence in human society. International Journal of Social Robotics, 2(4), 451-460. 
doi:10.1007/s12369-010-0079-2. 
Santos, J. R. A. (1999). Cronbach’s alpha: A tool for assessing the reliability of scales. Journal 
of Extension, 37(2), 1-5. 
Sarrazin, N. (2016). Children’s Musical Play: Musicality and Creativity. Music and the Child. 
Sarrica, M., Brondi, S., & Fortunati, L. (2019). How many facets does a “social robot” have? A 
review of scientific and popular definitions online. Information Technology & People. 
doi:10.1108/ITP-04-2018-0203 
Streiner, D. L. (2003). Starting at the beginning: an introduction to coefficient alpha and internal 
consistency. Journal of Oersonality Assessment, 80(1), 99-103. doi: 
10.1207/S15327752JPA8001_18. 
Sawicki, D. (2003). The Rise of the Creative Class: And How it's Transforming Work, Leisure, 
Community and Everyday Life (Vol. 69). Chicago, IL, US: Taylor & Francis Inc. 
Sawyer, R. K. (2010). Individual and Group Creativity. The Cambridge handbook of creativity, 
366-380. 
Sawyer, K. R. (2017). Group Genius: The Creative Power of Collaboration. New York, NY, 
US: Basic Books. 
Sawyer, K. R. (2017). Teaching creativity in art and design studio classes: A systematic literature 
review. Educational Research Review, 22, 99-113. doi:10.1016/j.edurev.2017.07.002 
Sawyer, K. R. (2011). Explaining Creativity: The Science of Human Innovation. New York, NY, 
US: Oxford University Press. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
303 
Sawyer, R. K., & DeZutter, S. (2009). Distributed creativity: How collective creations emerge 
from collaboration. Psychology of Aesthetics, Creativity, and the Arts, 3(2), 81. 
doi:10.1037/a0013282 
Sawyer, R. K., John-Steiner, V., Moran, S., Sternberg, R. J., Feldman, D. H., Nakamura, J., & 
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2003). Creativity and Development. New York, NY, US: Oxford 
University Press. 
Scassellati, B. (2002). Theory of mind for a humanoid robot. Autonomous Robots, 12(1), 13-24. 
doi:10.1023/A:1013298507114. 
Scassellati, B. (2003, July). Investigating models of social development using a humanoid robot. 
In Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on Neural Networks, 2003. (Vol. 4, pp. 
2704-2709). IEEE. doi:10.1109/IJCNN.2003.1223995. 
Scassellati, B., Admoni, H., & Matarić, M. (2012). Robots for use in autism research. Annual 
Review of Biomedical Engineering, 14, 275-294. Doi: 10.1146/annurev-bioeng-071811-
150036. 
Scassellati, B., Boccanfuso, L., Huang, C. M., Mademtzi, M., Qin, M., Salomons, N., Ventola, 
P., & Shic, F. (2018). Improving social skills in children with ASD using a long-term, in-
home social robot. Science Robotics, 3(21), eaat7544. doi:10.1126/scirobotics.aat7544. 
Schardt, C., Adams, M. B., Owens, T., Keitz, S., & Fontelo, P (2007). Utilization of the PICO 
framework to improve searching PubMed for clinical questions. BMC Medical 
Informatics and Decision Making, 7(1), 1-6. doi: 10.1186/1472-6947-7-16. 
Schleicher, D., Jones, P., & Kachur, O. (2010). Bodystorming as embodied 
designing. Interactions, 17(6), 47-51. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
304 
Scholtz, J. (2003, January). Theory and evaluation of human robot interactions. In 36th 
Proceedings of the Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, 2003. 
(pp. 10-pp). IEEE. doi:10.1109/HICSS.2003.1174284. 
Schuler, D., & Namioka, A. (Eds.). (1993). Participatory Design: Principles and Practices. 
Hillsdale, New jersey, US: CRC Press. 
Schweikardt, E., & Gross, M. D. (2007, March). A brief survey of distributed computational 
toys. In 2007 First IEEE International Workshop on Digital Game and Intelligent Toy 
Enhanced Learning (DIGITEL'07) (pp. 57-64). IEEE. doi:10.1109/DIGITEL.2007.4. 
Scott, G., Leritz, L. E., & Mumford, M, M. D. (2004). Types of creativity training: Approaches 
and their effectiveness. The Journal of Creative Behavior, 38(3), 149-179. 
Scott, G., Leritz, L. E., & Mumford, M. (2004). The effectiveness of creativity training: A 
quantitative review. Creativity Research Journal, 16(4), 361-388. 
Segura, E. M., Vidal, L. T., & Rostami, A. (2016). Bodystorming for movement-based 
interaction design. Human Technology, 12(2). 
Sengers, P., Boehner, K., David, S., & Kaye, J. J. (2005, August). Reflective design. In 
Proceedings of the 4th decennial conference on Critical computing: between sense and 
sensibility (pp. 49-58). ACM. doi:10.1145/1094562.1094569. 
Serholt, S. (2018). Breakdowns in children’s interactions with a robotic tutor: A longitudinal 
study. Computers in Human Behavior, 81, 250-264. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2017.12.030. 
Sequeira, P., Alves-Oliveira, P., Ribeiro, T., Di Tullio, E., Petisca, S., Melo, F. S., Castellano, 
G., & Paiva, A. (2016, March). Discovering social interaction strategies for robots from 
restricted-perception Wizard-of-Oz studies. In The eleventh ACM/IEEE international 
conference on human robot interaction (pp. 197-204). IEEE Press. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
305 
Shamay-Tsoory, S. G., Adler, N., Aharon-Peretz, J., Perry, D., & Mayseless, N. (2011). The 
origins of originality: the neural bases of creative thinking and 
originality. Neuropsychologia, 49(2), 178-185. 
doi:10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2010.11.020. 
Shamsuddin, S., Yussof, H., Ismail, L., Hanapiah, F. A., Mohamed, S., Piah, H. A., & Zahari, N. 
I. (2012, March). Initial response of autistic children in human-robot interaction therapy 
with humanoid robot NAO. In IEEE 8th International Colloquium on Signal Processing 
and its Applications (pp. 188-193). IEEE. doi:10.1109/CSPA.2012.6194716. 
Shen, S., Slovak, P., & Jung, M. F. (2018, February). Stop. I see a conflict happening.: A robot 
mediator for young children's interpersonal conflict resolution. In Proceedings of the 
2018 ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (pp. 69-77). 
ACM. doi:10.1145/3171221.3171248. 
Shibata, T. (2004). An overview of human interactive robots for psychological enrichment. 
Proceedings of the IEEE, 92(11), 1749-1758. doi:10.1109/JPROC.2004.835383. 
Shields, M. K., & Behrman, R. E. (2000). Children and computer technology: Analysis and 
recommendations. The future of children, 4-30. 
*Shivley, J. E., Feldhusen, J. F., & Treffinger, D. J. (1972). Developing creativity and related 
attitudes. The Journal of Experimental Education, 41(2), 63-69. 
doi:10.1080/00220973.1972.11011395. 
Short, E., Swift-Spong, K., Greczek, J., Ramachandran, A., Litoiu, A., Grigore, E. C., Feil-
Seifer, ., Shuster, S., ee, J. J., Levonisova, S., Litz, J., Li, J., Spruijt-Metz, D., Matarić, 
M., & Scassellati, B. (2014, August). How to train your dragonbot: Socially assistive 
robots for teaching children about nutrition through play. In The 23rd IEEE International 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
306 
Symposium on Robot and Human Interactive Communication (pp. 924-929). IEEE. 
doi:10.1109/ROMAN.2014.6926371. 
Shuster, M. M., Mikels, J. A., & Camras, L. A. (2017). Adult age differences in the interpretation 
of surprised facial expressions. Emotion, 17(2), 191. doi:10.1037/emo0000234. 
Silvia, P. J. (2008). Creativity and intelligence revisited: A latent variable analysis of Wallach 
and Kogan. Creativity Research Journal, 20(1), 34-39. 
doi:10.1080/10400410701841807. 
Silvia, P. J., Kaufman, J. C., & Pretz, J. E. (2009). Is creativity domain-specific? Latent class 
models of creative accomplishments and creative self-descriptions. Psychology of 
Aesthetics, Creativity, and the Arts, 3(3), 139-148. doi:10.1037/a0014940. 
Simonsen, J., & Robertson, T. (Eds.). (2012). Routledge international handbook of participatory 
design. London and New York, UK and US: Routledge, Taylor and Francis Group. 
Simonton, D. K. (2010). Creativity in highly eminent individuals. In J. C. Kaufman, & R. J. 
Sternberg, The Cambridge Handbook of Creativity. New York, NY, US: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Simonton, D. K. (2018). Defining creativity: Don't we also need to define what is not creative? 
The Journal of Creative Behavior, 52(1), 80-90. 
Singer, D. G., & Singer, J. L. (2009). The house of make-believe: Children’s play and the 
developing imagination. Harvard, UK: University Press. 
Sirkin, D., Baltodano, S., Mok, B., Rothenbücher, D., Gowda, N., Li, J., Martelaro, N., Miller, 
D., Sibi, S., & Ju, W. (2016). Embodied design improvisation for autonomous vehicles. 
In Design Thinking Research (pp. 125-143). Springer, Cham. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-
40382-3_9. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
307 
Sirkin, D., & Ju, W. (2015). Embodied design improvisation: a method to make tacit design 
knowledge explicit and usable. In Design Thinking Research (pp. 195-209). Springer, 
Cham. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-06823-7_11. 
Sirkin, D., Mok, B., Yang, S., & Ju, W. (2015, March). Mechanical ottoman: how robotic 
furniture offers and withdraws support. In Proceedings of the Tenth Annual ACM/IEEE 
International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (pp. 11-18). ACM. doi: 
10.1145/2696454.2696461. 
Slyper, R., Hoffman, G., & Shamir, A. (2015, January). Mirror puppeteering: Animating toy 
robots in front of a webcam. In Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on 
Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied Interaction (pp. 241-248). ACM. 
doi:10.1145/2677199.2680548. 
Smith, G. F. (1998). Idea‐generation techniques: A formulary of active ingredients. The Journal 
of Creative Behavior, 32(2), 107-134. doi:10.1002/j.2162-6057.1998.tb00810.x. 
Smith, G. J., & Carlsson, I. (1983). Creativity in early and middle school years. International 
Journal of Behavioral Development, 6(2), 167-195. 
Smith, G., & Carlsson, I. (1985). Creativity in middle and late school years. International 
Journal of Behavioral Development, 8(3), 329-343. 
Smith, P. K. (2017). Children's play: Research developments and practical applications. London 
and New York, UK and US: Routledge. 
Smith, S. M. (1995). Fixation, incubation, and insight in memory and creative thinking. In Smith, 
S. M., Ward, T. B., & Finke, R. A., The Creative Cognition Approach (135-156). USA: 
MIT. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
308 
*Smogorzewska, J. (2012). Storyline and associations pyramid as methods of creativity 
enhancement: Comparison of effectiveness in 5-year-old children. Thinking Skills and 
Creativity,7(1), 28-37. doi:10.1016/j.tsc.2011.12.003. 
*Smogorzewska, J. (2014). Developing children’s language creativity through telling stories - 
An experimental study. Thinking Skills and Creativity, 13, 20-31. 
doi:10.1016/j.tsc.2014.02.005. 
Sneck, S., Viholainen, H., Syväoja, H., Kankaapää, A., Hakonen, H., Poikkeus, A. M., & 
Tammelin, T. (2019). Effects of school-based physical activity on mathematics 
performance in children: a systematic review. International Journal of Behavioral 
Nutrition and Physical Activity, 16(1), 109. doi:10.1186/s12966-019-0866-6. 
Soh, K. (2017). Fostering student creativity through teacher behaviors. Thinking Skills and 
Creativity, 23, 58-66.  
Solomon, C. J., & Papert, S. A. (1976). A case study of a young child doing Turtle Graphics in 
LOGO. 
*Sowden, P. T., Clements, L., Redlich, C., & Lewis, C. (2015). Improvisation facilitates 
divergent thinking and creativity: Realizing a benefit of primary school arts education. 
Psychology of Aesthetics, Creativity, and the Arts, 9(2), 128-138. 
doi:10.1037/aca0000018. 
Spadafora, M., Chahuneau, V., Martelaro, N., Sirkin, D., & Ju, W. (2016, February). Designing 
the behavior of interactive objects. In Proceedings of the TEI'16: Tenth International 
Conference on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied Interaction (pp. 70-77). ACM. 
doi:10.1145/2839462.2839502. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
309 
Spodek, B., & Saracho, O. N. (2014). Handbook of Research on the Education of Young 
Children. New York, NY, US: Routledge: Taylor & Francis Group. 
Spolaôr, N., & Benitti, F. B. V. (2017). Robotics applications grounded in learning theories on 
tertiary education: A systematic review. Computers & Education, 112, 97-107. 
doi:10.1016/j.compedu.2017.05.001. 
St-Louis, A. C., & Vallerand, R. J. (2015). A successful creative process: The role of passion and 
emotions. Creativity Research Journal, 27(2), 175-187. 
doi:10.1080/10400419.2015.1030314. 
Steinfeld, A., Jenkins, O. C., & Scassellati, B. (2009, March). The oz of wizard: simulating the 
human for interaction research. In Proceedings of the 4th ACM/IEEE international 
conference on Human robot interaction (pp. 101-108). ACM. 
doi:10.1145/1514095.1514115. 
Sternber, R. J. (1988). The nature of creativity: Contemporary psychological perspectives. New 
York, NY, US: Cambridge University Press. 
Sternberg, R. J. (1999). Handbook of Creativity. New York, NY, US: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Sternberg, R. J. (2005). Creativity or creativities? International Journal of Human-Computer 
Studies, 63(4-5), 370-382. doi:10.1016/j.ijhcs.2005.04.003. 
Sternberg, R. J., & Kaufman, J. C. (2018). The Nature of Human Creativity. New York, NY, US: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Sternberg, R. J., & Lubart, T. I. (1996). Investing in creativity. American Psychologist, 51(7), 
677-688. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
310 
Stroud, J. E. (1995). Block play: Building a foundation for literacy. Early Childhood Education 
Journal, 23(1), 9-13. doi:10.1007/BF02353373. 
Sublette, V. A., & Mullan, B. (2012). Consequences of play: A systematic review of the effects 
of online gaming. International Journal of Mental Health and Addiction, 10(1), 3-23. 
doi:10.1007/s11469-010-9304-3. 
Sutton-Smith, B. (1986). Toys as culture. Gardner Press, Inc., 19 Union Square West, New York, 
NY 10003. 
Sutton‐Smith, B. (1992). The role of toys in the instigation of playful creativity. Creativity 
Research Journal, 5(1), 3-11. doi:10.1080/10400419209534418. 
Sutton, T. M., & Altarriba, J. (2016). Color associations to emotion and emotion-laden words: A 
collection of norms for stimulus construction and selection. Behavior research 
methods, 48(2), 686-728. doi:10.3758/s13428-015-0598-8. 
Schwartzman, H. (Ed.). (2012). Transformations: The Anthropology of Children’s Play. 
Chicago: Illinois, US: Springer Science & Business Media. 
Szafir, D., Mutlu, B., & Fong, T. (2015, March). Communicating directionality in flying robots. 
In 2015 10th ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI) 
(pp. 19-26). IEEE. 
Tadmor, C. T., Satterstrom, P., Jang, S., & Polzer, J. T. (2002). Beyond individual creativity: 
The superadditive benefits of multicultural experience for collective creativity in 
culturally diverse teams. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 43(3), 384-392. 
doi:10.1177/0022022111435259. 
Tan, C. T., & Soh, D. (2010). Augmented reality games: A review. Proceedings of Gameon-
Arabia, Eurosis. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
311 
Tan, C. S., Lau, X. S., Kung, Y. T., & Kailsan, R. A. L. (2019). Openness to experience 
enhances creativity: The mediating role of intrinsic motivation and the creative process 
engagement. The Journal of Creative Behavior, 53(1), 109-119. 
Tanaka, F., Cicourel, A., & Movellan, J. R. (2007). Socialization between toddlers and robots at 
an early childhood education center. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
104(46), 17954-17958. doi:10.1073/pnas.0707769104. 
Tanaka, F., Isshiki, K., Takahashi, F., Uekusa, M., Sei, R., & Hayashi, K. (2015, November). 
Pepper learns together with children: Development of an educational application. In 2015 
IEEE-RAS 15th International Conference on Humanoid Robots (Humanoids) (pp. 270-
275). IEEE. doi:10.1109/HUMANOIDS.2015.7363546. 
Taylor, C. W. (1988). Various approaches to and definitions of creativity. In R. J. Sternberg, The 
Nature of Creativity: Contemporary Psychological Perspectives (pp. 99-121). New York, 
NY, US: Cambridge University Press. 
Tejima, N. (2001). Rehabilitation robotics: a review. Advanced Robotics, 14(7), 551-564. doi: 
10.1163/156855301742003. 
Tennent, H., Moore, D., & Ju, W. (2018). Character actor: Design and evaluation of expressive 
robot car seat motion. Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and 
Ubiquitous Technologies, 1(4), 165. doi:10.1145/3161407. 
Tennent, H., Moore, D., Jung, M., & Ju, W. (2017). Good vibrations: How consequential sounds 
affect perception of robotic arms. In 2017 26th IEEE International Symposium on Robot 
and Human Interactive Communication (RO-MAN) (pp. 928-935). IEEE. 
doi:10.1109/ROMAN.2017.8172414. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
312 
Terada, K., Yamauchi, A., & Ito, A. (2012, September). Artificial emotion expression for a robot 
by dynamic color change. In 2012 IEEE RO-MAN: The 21st IEEE International 
Symposium on Robot and Human Interactive Communication (pp. 314-321). IEEE. 
doi:10.1109/ROMAN.2012.6343772. 
Terwogt, M. M., & Hoeksma, J. B. (1995). Colors and emotions: Preferences and 
combinations. The Journal of General Psychology, 122(1), 5-17. 
doi:10.1080/00221309.1995.9921217. 
Thomas, F., Johnston, O., & Thomas, F. (1995). The illusion of life: Disney animation (pp. 306-
312). New York: Hyperion. 
Thompson, R., & Goodvin, R. (2005). Concepts and theories of human development: Historical 
and contemporary dimensions. Developmental Science: An Advanced Textbook, 5, 391-
428. 
Tinwell, A., Grimshaw, M., Nabi, D. A., & Williams, A. (2011). Facial expression of emotion 
and perception of the Uncanny Valley in virtual characters. Computers in Human 
Behavior, 27(2), 741-749. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2010.10.018. 
Toh, L. P. E., Causo, A., Tzuo, P. W., Chen, I. M., & Yeo, S. H. (2016). A review on the use of 
robots in education and young children. Journal of Educational Technology & 
Society, 19(2), 148-163. 
Torrance, E. P. (1966). Torrance tests of creative thinking: Norms-technical manual: Verbal 
tests, forms a and b: Figural tests, forms a and b. Personal Press, Incorporated. 
Torrance, P. E. (1968). A longitudinal examination of the fourth grade slump in creativity. Gifted 
Child Quarterly, 12(4), 195-199. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
313 
Torrance, P. E. (1988). The nature of creativity as manifest in its testing. In R. J. Sternberg, 
Robert J., The Nature of Creativity: Contemporary Psychological Perspectives. New 
York, NY, US: Cambridge University Press. 
Torrance, P. E., & Torrance, P. (1972). Combining creative problem-solving with creative 
expressive activities in the education of disadvantaged young people. The Journal of 
Creative Behavior, 6(1), 1-10. doi:10.1002/j.2162-6057.1972.tb00902.x. 
Tottenham, N., Phuong, J., Flannery, J., Gabard-Durnam, L., & Goff, B. (2013). A negativity 
bias for ambiguous facial-expression valence during childhood: Converging evidence 
from behavior and facial corrugator muscle responses. Emotion, 13(1), 92. 
doi:10.1037/a0029431. 
Truong, K. N., Hayes, G. R., & Abowd, G. D. (2006, June). Storyboarding: an empirical 
determination of best practices and effective guidelines. In Proceedings of the 6th 
Conference on Designing Interactive Systems (pp. 12-21). ACM. 
doi:10.1145/1142405.1142410. 
Tsvyatkova, D., & Storni, C. (2019). A review of selected methods, techniques and tools in 
Child-Computer Interaction (CCI) developed/adapted to support children’s involvement 
in technology development. International Journal of Child-Computer Interaction. 
doi:10.1016/j.ijcci.2019.100148. 
Turing, A. M. (2009). Computing machinery and intelligence. In Parsing the Turing Test (pp. 
23-65). Springer, Dordrecht. doi:10.1007/978-1-4020-6710-5_3. 
UNESCO. (2017). Brussels: Official Journal of the European Union. Retrieved 10 2019, from 
UNESCO moving forward the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development: 
https://en.unesco.org/creativity/files/unesco-moving-forward-2030-agenda-sustainable 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
314 
Urban, K. K. (1991). On the development of creativity in children. Creativity Research Journal, 
4(2), 177-191. 
Urban, K. K. (2004). Assessing creativity: the test for creative thinking-drawing production 
(TCT-DP) the concept, application, evaluation, and international studies. Psychology 
Science, 46(3), 387-397. 
Urban, K. K. (2005). Assessing Creativity: The Test for Creative Thinking-Drawing Production 
(TCT-DP). International Education Journal, 6(2), 272-280. 
Urban, K. K., & Jellen, H. G. (1996). Manual of Test for Creative Thinking-Drawing Production 
(TCT-DP). Amesterdam: Harcourt. 
Van den Akker, J. (1999). Principles and methods of development research. In Design 
approaches and tools in education and training (pp. 1-14). Springer, Dordrecht. 
doi:10.1007/978-94-011-4255-7_1. 
Van den Akker, J., Gravemeijer, K., McKenney, S., & Nieveen, N. (Eds.). (2006). Educational 
design research. London and New York, UK, US: Routledge. 
Van Doorn, F. (2016). Children as co-researchers in design: Enabling users to gather, share and 
enrich contextual data. Manuscript. Delft University of Technology, Delft. 
doi:10.4233/uuid:f16db80d-9f1a-4064-91be-decf8c805898. 
Van Dyne, L., & Saavedra, R. (1996). A naturalistic minority influence experiment: Effects on 
divergent thinking, conflict and originality in work‐groups. British Journal of Social 
Psychology, 35(1), 151-167. doi:10.1111/j.2044-8309.1996.tb01089.x. 
VanGundy, A. B. (1988). Techniques of structured problem solving. Springer. 
van Hoeve, B., De Valk, L., & Bekker, T. (2013, November). Toinggg: How changes in 
children’s activity level influence creativity in open-ended play. In International 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
315 
Conference on Advances in Computer Entertainment Technology (pp. 642-645). 
Springer, Cham. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-03161-3_72. 
Van Kesteren, I. E., Bekker, M. M., Vermeeren, A. P., & Lloyd, P. A. (2003, July). Assessing 
usability evaluation methods on their effectiveness to elicit verbal comments from 
children subjects. In Proceedings of the 2003 conference on Interaction design and 
children (pp. 41-49). ACM. doi: 10.1145/953536.953544. 
Van Mechelen, M., Sim, G., Zaman, B., Gregory, P., Slegers, K., & Horton, M. (2014, June). 
Applying the CHECk tool to participatory design sessions with children. In Proceedings 
of the 2014 conference on Interaction design and children (pp. 253-256). ACM. doi: 
10.1145/2593968.2610465. 
Vargas, E. A., & Vargas, J. S. (1991). Coaching children in social skills for friendship making. 
Journal of Behavioral Education, 1(2), 235-251. doi:10.1007/BF00957006. 
Vatsal, V., & Hoffman, G. (2018, May). Design and Analysis of a Wearable Robotic Forearm. In 
2018 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) (pp. 1-8). 
IEEE. doi:10.1109/ICRA.2018.8461212. 
Veale, A. (2005). Creative methodologies in participatory research with children. In Greene, G., 
& Hogan, D. (Eds.) Researching Children’s Experience: Approaches and Methods (pp. 
253-272). London, UK: SAGE Pulications Ltd. 
Vitanza, A., Rossetti, P., Mondada, F., & Trianni, V. (2019). Robot swarms as an educational 
tool: The Thymio’s way. International Journal of Advanced Robotic Systems, 16(1). 
doi:10.1177/1729881418825186 
Von Elm, E., Altman, D. G., Egger, M., Pocock, S. J., Gøtzsche, P. C., & Vandenbroucke, J. P. 
(2007). The Strengthening the Reporting of Observational Studies in Epidemiology 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
316 
(STROBE) statement: Guidelines for reporting observational studies. Annals of Internal 
Medicine, 147(8), 573-577. doi:10.7326/0003-4819-147-8-200710160-00010. 
von Laban, R. (1975). Modern Educational Dance. London, UK: Princeton Book Co Pub. 
Vygotsky, L. S. (1967). Play and its role in the mental development of the child. Soviet 
Psychology, 5(3), 6-18. doi:10.2753/RPO1061-040505036. 
Vygotsky, L. S. (1980). Mind in Society: The Development of Higher Psychological Processes. 
Cambridge, MA, US: Harvard university press. 
Vygotsky, L. S. (1987). Imagination and its development in childhood. In R. W. Rieber, & A. S. 
Carton, The Collected Works of LS Vygotsky (pp. 339-350). Boston, MA, US: Springer. 
Vygotsky, L. S. (1990). Imagination and creativity in childhood. Soviet Psychology, 28(1), 84-
96. 
Vygotsky, L. S. (2004). Imagination and creativity in childhood. Journal of Russian & East 
European Psychology, 42(1), 7-97. 
Wainer, J., Feil-Seifer, D. J., Shell, D. A., & Mataric, M. J. (2007, August). Embodiment and 
human-robot interaction: A task-based perspective. In RO-MAN 2007-The 16th IEEE 
International Symposium on Robot and Human Interactive Communication (pp. 872-
877). IEEE. doi:10.1109/ROMAN.2007.4415207. 
Wallace, C. E., & Russ, S. W. (2015). Pretend play, divergent thinking, and math achievement in 
girls: A longitudinal study. Psychology of Aesthetics, Creativity, and the Arts, 9(3), 296. 
doi:10.1037/a0039006. 
Wallas, G. (1926). The Art of Thought. London, UK: Jonathan Cape. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
317 
Wallbott, H. G. (1998). Bodily expression of emotion. European Journal of Social 
Psychology, 28(6), 879-896. doi:10.1002/(SICI)1099-0992(1998110)28:6<879::AID-
EJSP901>3.0.CO;2-W. 
Wang, P., Sibi, S., Mok, B., & Ju, W. (2017, March). Marionette: Enabling on-road wizard-of-oz 
autonomous driving studies. In 2017 12th ACM/IEEE International Conference on 
Human-Robot Interaction (HRI (pp. 234-243). IEEE. 
Walsh, G., Druin, A., Guha, M. L., Foss, E., Golub, E., Hatley, L., Bonsignore, E., & Franckel, 
S. (2010, April). Layered elaboration: a new technique for co-design with children. 
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 
1237-1240). ACM. doi: 10.1145/1753326.1753512. 
Ward, T. B. (2007). Creative cognition as a window on creativity. Methods, 41(1), 28-37. 
doi:10.1016/j.ymeth.2006.12.002. 
Ware, C. (2012). Information visualization: perception for design. Elsevier. 
Warren, T. F., & Davis, G. A. (1969). Techniques for creative thinking: An empirical 
comparison of three methods. Psychological Reports, 21(1), 207-214. 
doi:10.2466/pr0.1969.25.1.207. 
Westlund, J. M. K., Park, H. W., Williams, R., & Breazeal, C. (2018, June). Measuring young 
children's long-term relationships with social robots. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM 
Conference on Interaction Design and Children (pp. 207-218). ACM. 
doi:10.1145/3202185.3202732. 
Whitebread, D., Neale, D., Jensen, H., Liu, C., Solis, S. L., Hopkins, E., Hirsh-Pasek, K., & 
Zosh, J. (2017). The role of play in children's development: a review of the evidence. 
LEGO Fondation. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
318 
Whiting, C. S. (1958). Creative Thinking. New York, NY, USA: Reinhold. 
Wierenga, B., & Van Bruggen, G. H. (1998). The dependent variable in research into the effects 
of creativity support systems: Quality and quantity of ideas. MIS quarterly, 81-87. 
doi:10.2307/249679. 
Williams, T., Thames, D., Novakoff, J., & Scheutz, M. (2018, February). Thank you for sharing 
that interesting fact!: Effects of capability and context on indirect speech act use in task-
based human-robot dialogue. In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM/IEEE International 
Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (pp. 298-306). ACM. 
doi:10.1145/3171221.3171246. 
Winer, B. J., Brown, D. R., & Michels, K. M. (1971). Statistical principles in experimental 
design (Vol. 2). New York: McGraw-Hill. 
Wood, L. J., Zaraki, A., Robins, B., & Dautenhahn, K. (2019). Developing Kaspar: a humanoid 
robot for children with autism. International Journal of Social Robotics, 1-18. 
doi:10.1007/s12369-019-00563-6. 
World Economic Forum. (2018). World Economic Forum, report. Retrieved 10 2019, from The 
Future of Jobs Report 2018: 
http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF\_Future\_of\_Jobs\_2018.pdf 
Wright, A. (1995). Storytelling with Children. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Yan, R. (2016, July). i, Poet: Automatic Poetry Composition through Recurrent Neural Networks 
with Iterative Polishing Schema. In IJCAI (pp. 2238-2244). 
Yanco, H. A., & Drury, J. (2004, October). Classifying human-robot interaction: an updated 
taxonomy. In 2004 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
319 
(IEEE Cat. No. 04CH37583) (Vol. 3, pp. 2841-2846). IEEE. 
doi:10.1109/ICSMC.2004.1400763. 
Zaga, C., Moreno, A., & Evers, V. (2017, February). Gotta Hatch'em All! Robot-Supported 
Cooperation in Interactive Playgrounds. In Companion of the 2017 ACM Conference on 
Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing (pp. 347-350). ACM. 
doi:10.1145/3022198.3026355. 
Zaporah, R. (1995). Action theater: The Improvisation of Presence. Berkley, CA, US: North 
Atlantic Books. 
Zhou, J. and George, J. M. (2003). Awakening employee creativity: The role of leader emotional 
intelligence. The Leadership Quarterly, 14(4-5), 545-568. doi:10.1016/S1048-
9843(03)00051-1 
Zuckerman, O., Arida, S., & Resnick, M. (2005, April). Extending tangible interfaces for 
education: digital montessori-inspired manipulatives. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 859-868). ACM. 
doi:10.1145/1054972.1055093. 
Zuckerman, O., Hoffman, G., Kopelman-Rubin, D., Klomek, A. B., Shitrit, N., Amsalem, Y., & 
Shlomi, Y. (2016, February). KIP3: robotic companion as an external cue to students 
with ADHD. In Proceedings of the TEI'16: Tenth International Conference on Tangible, 
Embedded, and Embodied Interaction (pp. 621-626). ACM. 
doi:10.1145/2839462.2856535. 
 
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
320 
Appendix  
 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
321 
Appendix A 
 
TCT-DP Instructions Script - Forms A and B (Urban & Jellen, 1996) 
 
TCT-DP was applied under the instruction detailed below. 
In front of you is an incomplete drawing. 
The artist who started was interrupted before he knew what it was going to become. 
Please continue this incomplete drawing. 
You are allowed to draw whatever you want. 
Nothing you draw will be wrong. 
Everything you put on paper will be correct. 
When you finish drawing, you can give it a title. 
In case of the application of Form B, it was added: 
This is not the same initial drawing that the artist did, although it looks similar. 
After delivering the Form A/B to the participant, the researcher added: 
You can draw whatever you feel like. 
If there are questions from participants during the test, they will be answered only by saying: 
You are allowed to draw whatever you want. Or Everything is correct; there is no way to 
make mistakes. 
If there is any insistence from participants, they will be answered: 
You can start drawing and don't worry about time, but hey, we don't have an hour to 
complete it. 
When the participant finishes, it will be said: 
If you know a name or title or theme for your drawing, write it above your drawing. 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
322 
Appendix B – Bill of Materials for YOLO 
 
 
Designator 
Component 
Quantity 
Cost per 
unit in USD 
Total cost 
in USD 
Supplier 
1 
Raspberry Pi 
Raspberry Pi W Zero 
1 
10.00 
10.00 
https://www.adafruit.com/product/3400 
2 
Touch sensor 
Standalone 5-pad capacitive 
touch sensor breakout 
1 
7.50 
7.50 
https://www.adafruit.com/product/1362 
3 
Jewel 
NeoPixel jewel 7 x 5050 
RGBW LED w/ integrated 
drivers natural white 
~4500K 
1 
6.95 
6.95 
https://www.adafruit.com/product/2859 
4 
Voltage 
converter 
LM 2596 DC-DC buck 
converter step down module 
power supply output 1.23V-
30V 
1 
14.95 
14.95 
https://www.amazon.com/LM2596-Converter-Module-
Supply-1-23V-30V/dp/B008BHBEE0 
5 
Optical sensor 
Logitech wireless mouse 
M170 
1 
9.00 
9.00 
https://www.amazon.com/Logitech-M170-Wireless-USB-
mouse/dp/B01EKKPI9S 
6 
Motor driver 
DRV8838 single brushed 
DC motor driver 
3 
2.99 
8.97 
https://www.pololu.com/product/2990 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
323 
7 
Motor 
Micrometal gear motor HP 
6V 
3 
15.95 
47.85 
https://www.pololu.com/product/997 
8 
Protoboard 
Adafruit perma-proto 
quarter-sized breadboard 
PCB 
1 
2.50 
2.50 
https://www.adafruit.com/product/1608 
9 
Power 
distribution 
board 
Universal glass fiber PCB 
board 
1 
3.80 
3.80 
http://www.dx.com/p/universal-glass-fiber-pcb-board-for-
diy-project-brown-139590#.WyEMNVMvw_U 
10 
Ceramic 
capacitor 
Ceramic capacitor disc 
0.047µF 25V +80% to -20% 
1 
0.25 
0.25 
https://www.jameco.com 
11 
Electrolytic 
capacitor 
10uF 50V electrolytic 
capacitors 
1 
1.95 
1.95 
https://www.adafruit.com/product/2195 
12 
Wires 
Hook-up wire spool set 
22AWG solid core 6 x 25ft 
1 
15.95 
15.95 
https://www.adafruit.com/product/1311 
13 
Omni wheels 
38mm by 3mm omni wheels 
3 
6.30 
19.20 
https://it.aliexpress.com/store/product/8mm-1-5inch-
double-plastic-omni-wheel-with-3mm-mounting-hubs-
couplings-k18436/1455619_32478938051.html 
14 
Power bank 
USB battery pack 
4000mAh, 5V, 1A 
1 
24.95 
24.95 
https://www.adafruit.com/product/1565 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
324 
15 
9V battery 
EBL advanced 9V 1200 
mAh lithium batteries 
1 
5.50 
5.50 
https://www.amazon.com/EBL-Advanced-1200mAh-
Batteries-Non-Rechargeable/dp/B06Y64ZHF2 
16 
SD card 
SanDisk ultra 32GB micro 
SDHC UHS-I card with 
adapter 
1 
12.96 
12.96 
https://www.amazon.com/SanDisk-microSDHC-Standard-
Packaging-SDSQUNC-032G-GN6MA/dp/B010Q57T02 
17 
Router 
TP-Link N300 wireless wi-
fi router 2 x 5dBi high 
power antennas up to 
300Mbps 
1 
19.99 
19.99 
https://www.amazon.com/TP-Link-N300-Wireless-Wi-Fi-
Router-TL-WR841N/dp/B001FWYGJS 
18 
Glowing fibers 
CHINLY roll PMMA 
plastic 
1 
8.44 
8.44 
https://www.amazon.com 
19 
Coper tape 
Copper foil tape with 
conductive adhesive 
1 
5.95 
5.95 
https://www.adafruit.com/product/1128 
20 
Battery clip 
Cable connection 9V plastic 
battery clip connector 
buckle 
1 
0.40 
0.40 
https://www.amazon.com 
21 
Female USB to 
micro USB 
USB A female to micro 
USB B 5 pin male adapter 
cable 
1 
2.50 
2.50 
https://www.amazon.com 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
325 
22 
Micro USB 
Micro USB plug to 
5.5/2.1mm DC barrel jack 
adapter 
1 
1.95 
1.95 
https://www.adafruit.com/product/2727 
23 
90º USB 
USB to right angle mini 
USB with 90º 
1 
6.99 
6.99 
https://www.amazon.com 
24 
M2 brass 
inserts 
Heat-set inserts for plastics; 
M2 x 0.4mm thread; 2.9mm 
length 
28 
0.10 
10.44 
https://www.mcmaster.com/#catalog/124/3395/=1d96kgn 
25 
M3 brass 
inserts 
Heat-set inserts for plastics; 
M3 x 0.5mm thread; 3.8mm 
length 
3 
0.12 
12.30 
https://www.mcmaster.com/#catalog/124/3395/=1d96lus 
26 
Hex standoff 
Nylon 6/6 plastic hex 
standoff 3/16”; 3/16” long; 
2-56 female thread 
2 
1.47 
2.94 
https://www.mcmaster.com/#92319A210 
27 
Small round 
standoff 
Nylon 6/6 female threaded 
round standoff 1/4" OD; 
13/32” length; 4-40 thread 
2 
1.40 
2.80 
https://www.mcmaster.com/#96110A070 
28 
Big round 
standoff 
Nylon 6/6 female threaded 
round standoff 1/4” OD; 1-
1/4” length; 4-40 thread 
3 
2.00 
6.00 
https://www.mcmaster.com/#96110A009 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
326 
29 
M2 pan head 
screw 
Nylon pan head Philips 
screws M2 x 0.40mm thread 
5mm 
18 
0.90 
4.98 
https://www.mcmaster.com/#92492A702 
30 
M3 pan head 
screw 
Nylon pan head Philips 
screws M3 x 0.50mm thread 
16mm 
3 
0.23 
7.82 
https://www.mcmaster.com/#92492a721/=1d9nrmo 
31 
Long screw 
Passivated 18-8 stainless 
steel pan head Philips screw 
1-72 thread 1” long 
6 
1.33 
11.09 
https://www.mcmaster.com/#91772A187 
32 
Socket head 
screw 
Black-oxide alloy steel 
socket head screw M4 x 
0.7mm thread 18mm long 
3 
0.34 
11.31 
https://www.mcmaster.com/#91290A164 
33 
Small flat head 
screw 
Nylon slotted flat head 
screws; 100º countersink; 2-
56 thread; 1/8” long 
4 
0.25 
6.13 
https://www.mcmaster.com/#92929A107 
34 
Big flat head 
screw 
Nylon slotted flat head 
screws 100º countersink; 4-
40 thread; 5/16” long 
13 
0.73 
5.59 
https://www.mcmaster.com/#92929A131 
35 
Shell 
3D printed design in PLA 
1 
19.28 
19.28 
https://www.3dprintingbusiness.directory/company/ff3dm/ 
36 
Circular layers 
3D printed design in PLA 
1 
68.44 
68.44 
https://www.3dprintingbusiness.directory/company/ff3dm/ 
BOOSTING CREATIVITY WITH ROBOTS 
 
327 
37 
Motor docking 
3D printed design in PLA 
6 
2.00 
12.00 
https://www.3dprintingbusiness.directory/company/ff3dm/ 
38 
Washer 
3D printed design in PLA 
3 
1.00 
3.00 
https://www.3dprintingbusiness.directory/company/ff3dm/ 
39 
Glowing fibers 
layer 
Laser cut design in clear 
acrylic with 1.50mm of 
material thickness 
1 
15.54 
15.54 
https://www.sculpteo.com/en/ 
 
