1 
Dreams for Digital Spaces Symposium Paper: What Shapes the Worlds of Children, 
Educators and Researchers? 
 
Organising contributors: Sarah Healy
1 and Kathryn Coleman1 
Contributors (named in order of appearance): Aleesha Rodriguez,2 Rebecca Ng,3 Amanda 
Belton,4 Karen Thomson,4 Jessica Laraine Williams, 1,5 Neda Sajadi,1 Xinyu (Andy) Zhao5 and Rebekah 
Willett5,6 
 
1 Melbourne Graduate School of Education, The University of Melbourne 
2 Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence for the Digital Child, Queensland University of Technology 
3 Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence for the Digital Child, University of Wollongong 
4 Melbourne Data Analytics Platform, The University of Melbourne 
5 Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence for the Digital Child, Deakin University 
6 University of Wisconsin–Madison 
 
 Corresponding author: Sarah Healy, Melbourne Graduate School of Education, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, 
Victoria 3010, Australia. Email: sarah.healy@unimelb.edu.au 
 
Abstract  
Dreams for Digital Spaces Symposium explores the array of so-called truths that shape the digital 
worlds of children, educators, researchers, imaginaries, data, AI, algorithms and more through a 
series of four interconnected presentations involving research that takes up the digital as a focus 
and/or mode of inquiry.  Together the presentations demonstrate the power of combining data 
science with philosophy, artistry, co-design, and educational research through interdisciplinary 
collaborations – collaborations which have folded in and out of each other as ideas, methods and 
even people have travelled. The symposium offers the audience an opportunity to consider how 
digital practices become the stuff of dreams and nightmares, making room for a multiplicity of 
potentially transformative truths to take place across virtual and physical sites. 
 
Keywords 
Digital futures, imaginaries, metaverse, digital ecology, data, AI, SF, digital childhoods 
  
Our digital play cuts across projects, institutions and immersive spaces. We are building on 
the concepts of digital play that Plowman (2020) explores through the ways that children can play 
with, explore, and use digital technologies in much the same way as they do with more traditional 
play activities. Our play also moves between traditional and non-traditional scholarly research, with 
our connections drawn across metho-pedagogic spaces (MacDonald et al., 2022). The four 
presentations comprising the Dreams for Digital Spaces Symposium contribute to scholarship 
concerned with digital childhoods and digital methods by demonstrating how a selected concept, 
method, and/or practice has the power to change how both educators and researchers critically and 
creatively engage with research; making it possible for new, potentially transformative, digital 
imaginaries to be brought into being.  
The presentations offer movement between our speculations and future-casting  (Rae & 
Coleman, 2021) of the dreams we have for digital spaces and what might be, and how this shapes 
the worlds of children, educators and researchers. The interdisciplinary teams presenting here are 
2 
variously composed of researchers, artists, designers and data scientists affiliated with either the 
Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence for the Digital Child or The University of 
Melbourne. The presentations are sequenced to convey the interrelationships between the featured 
research projects while maintaining the narrative arch of the symposium. Each presentation engages 
with digital practice as either method and/or research focus to draw out its potential for sparking 
educational transformation by simultaneously proliferating and challenging digital truths. A recurring 
theme is the way in which empirical material, when explored through the lens of data creativities, 
illuminates how the various digital dispositions of children, parents, educators and researchers are 
shaped. 
This Symposium explores the array of so-called truths that shape the digital worlds of 
children, educators, researchers, imaginaries, data, AI, algorithms and more. We first presented this 
‘project’ in Adelaide in 2022 as the heat of summer spread across Australia. The opportunity to re-
position this work in a different time and context (Chicago 2023) within a new conference theme 
called for a weaving of speculations across our research. We troubled ‘Interrogating consequential 
educational research in pursuit of truth’ and how our Australian Association for Research in 
Education Featured  Symposium ‘Dreams for Digital Spaces’ designed for the theme ‘Transforming 
the Future of Education: The Role of Research’ could push the boundaries of ideas, methods, and 
collaborations.  
Each year The Australian Association for Research in Education (AARE) is invited to send a 
representative symposium to the British Educational Research Association (BERA) and the American 
Educational Research Association (AERA). Such symposia are intended to showcase the quality of 
Australian education research and the selected symposium team should see themselves as 
ambassadors of AARE. This is the selected symposium, and our teamplay is:  
● Dr Sarah Healy, Melbourne Postdoctoral Fellow, Melbourne Graduate School of Education 
The University of Melbourne & Research Fellow (alumnus), Deakin University The Australian 
Research Council Centre of Excellence for the Digital Child.  
● Dr Kathryn Coleman, Associate Professor Teacher Education, Melbourne Graduate School of 
Education The University of Melbourne 
● Dr Aleesha Rodriguez, Research Fellow, QUT The Australian Research Council Centre of 
Excellence for the Digital Child.  
● Dr Rebecca Ng, Research Fellow, University of Wollongong The Australian Research Council 
Centre of Excellence for the Digital Child.  
● Amanda Belton, Data Scientist Melbourne Data Analytics Platform, The University of 
Melbourne 
● Karen Thompson, Senior Research Data Specialist Melbourne Data Analytics Platform, The 
University of Melbourne 
● Jessica L. Williams, Research Fellow, Deakin University The Australian Research Council 
Centre of Excellence for the Digital Child & Melbourne Graduate School of Education The 
University of Melbourne 
● Dr Neda Sajadi, Researcher, Melbourne Graduate School of Education The University of 
Melbourne 
● Dr Xinyu (Andy) Zhao, Research Fellow, Deakin University The Australian Research Council 
Centre of Excellence for the Digital Child.  
● Dr Rebekah Willett, Professor, Partner Investigator University of Wisconsin–Madison The 
Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence for the Digital Child.  
 
3 
The role of imaginaries in (co)creating digital futures with children 
 
 
Figure 1: Deep dream generator prompt:  The role of imaginaries in (co)creating digital futures with children.  
 
Imagine a future where young children’s perspectives are thoroughly included in the design of the 
digital technologies they use. This is the provocation that guides a project that is part of the 
Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence for the Digital Child, called “Speculating about my 
Digital Future: Children and practitioners (co)creating design fiction.” The research embodies the 
principles of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child and specifically, attempts to 
operationalise General Comment No. 25 (2021) on children’s rights in relation to the digital 
environment. Namely, the project brings children’s perspectives into dialogue with media and 
technology practitioners who “should involve all children, listen to their needs and give due weight 
to their views” when considering the development of their products and services (OHCHR, 2021, 
para. 17). 
This research addresses a growing need to engage both children and practitioners, in 
understanding children’s rights within digital environments, especially following the pandemic 
where we saw a surge in the use of digital technologies across all sectors (De’ et al., 2020). This 
three-stage project—which 1) consults young children about future digital technologies, 2) asks 
practitioners to speculate a future where all technologies are designed from children’s perspectives, 
and 3) hosts a public exhibition to showcase the children and practitioners’ works—contributes to 
the transformation of education by proposing a creative and forward-looking way to approach 
4 
digital literacy and the take-up of digital technologies in a child’s life. In this paper, we provide an 
overview of the conceptual frameworks and methodology that underpins this research. 
The key concepts that underpin this research are imaginaries, and specifically sociotechnical 
imaginaries. Imaginaries are not mere illusions or fantasies but rich cultural resources that are 
imbued with implicit understandings of desired futures (Jasanoff & Kim, 2015). Imaginaries are the 
mental models we employ to think about how the world works as they allow us to consider complex 
relations by contemplating how different things (ought) to fit together. For example, it is an 
imaginary to consider that by sending your child to a private school they will get a good education, 
which will result in better outcomes later in life. While there are many competing socio-political-
economic factors that may render that imaginary true, what is noteworthy here is that the imaginary 
comes with a set of normative notions and expectations of how things ought to unfold (Taylor, 
2003). Imaginaries are something that an individual can employ, as well as something a public can 
engage with. In 2009, Jasanoff and Kim argued that large-scale and national science and technology 
projects—like nuclear power—evoked public imaginaries about the future. Known as sociotechnical 
imaginaries, these are the “reservoir of norms and discourses, metaphors and cultural meanings” 
that circulate through engaged publics who “articulate feasible futures” obtained through the 
development of science and technology (Jasanoff & Kim, 2009, p. 123). As such, sociotechnical 
imaginaries “are powerful cultural resources that help shape social responses to innovation” 
(Jasanoff & Kim, 2013, p. 190), as “they project visions of what is good and worth attaining” through 
the advancement of emerging technologies (Sovacool & Hess, 2017, p. 719). 
Emerging digital technologies—such as the Chat GPT, the Metaverse, Smart Speakers etc—
conjure particular sociotechnical imaginaries about the future. And these futures often evoke what 
Goode (2018) calls the “sublime spectacle of inevitability” (p. 204). The ‘spectacle of inevitability’ 
suggests that, since these technologies are now in motion (that is, they are being widely adopted in 
industrial, educational, and domestic settings) there is little we can do in terms of how these digital 
technologies unfold in our lives. Chat GPT will be used in classrooms, or at least there is little point to 
challenge it otherwise, according to New York Times technology reporter Kevin Roose (2023). These 
types of imaginaries—the ones that induce inevitable futures—bring about discourse closure 
(Markham, 2021). They shut down the possibility of, very real, alternative futures. Thus, “it matters 
what futures we use to cultivate other futures with” (Wilkie, 2017, p. 5) and why the concept and 
methods of speculative fiction are instrumental in attempting to challenge existing and limiting 
imaginaries about future digital technologies. 
The relationship between imaginaries and technological innovation is showcased through 
the literary genre of speculative- and science- fiction. Literary theorist Lubomír Doležel (1998) argues 
that “literary fiction is probably the most active experimental laboratory of the world-constructing 
enterprise” (p. ix). This is because it not only allows us to conceive what the future could look like, 
but as an artform, also allows us to critically reflect on and engage with current sociotechnical 
issues, practices, and processes. For example, some scholars argue that science fiction author Arthur 
C. Clarke foreshadowed satellite communications and the Internet (Robinson, 2017). In this way, 
speculative fiction—“the ability to literally imagine other worlds and alternatives” (Dunne & Raby, 
2013, p. 70)—becomes a crucial modality in challenging the spectacle of inevitability. Hence these 
arguments inspire us to advocate for the imaginaries produced by children about their digital futures 
be included in discussions by practitioners, as their contributions now may have implications for how 
technologies of the future are designed. 
5 
To operationalise these conceptual frameworks in the research, we draw on Dunne and 
Raby’s (2013) methodology of speculative design fiction. Speculative design invites participants to 
write, draw, collage, record, and reflect on what other worlds and alternative possibilities could be. 
It is a form of “communication and social object [that] creates interactions and dialogues around 
futures that were missing before” (Scott Smith quoted in, Hary, 2018, para. 4). By creating 
speculative, provocative, and hypothetical scenarios through creative artifacts (e.g., fictional writing, 
art, videos etc.), possible futures are made real enough for people to engage in meaningful 
conversations, which allow the exploration and critique of said futures. Notably within Dunne and 
Raby’s (2013) approach to speculative design fiction, is that “rather than thinking about architecture, 
products, and the environment” they suggest “we start with laws, ethics, political systems, social 
beliefs, values, fears, and hopes” (Dunne & Raby, 2013, p. 70). As such, we begin the research by 
consulting children about what features, values and ethics they want encoded into the digital 
technologies they want in the future—asking them how the technology makes them feel and why 
others might like it, among other questions. This rich information is then presented to the 
practitioners to ground their speculation—what if all digital technologies were made from the 
values, fears, and hopes expressed by children? 
We hope that this research acts as a public provocation, not only in terms of advocating for 
children’s perspectives to be included in the design of the digital technologies they use, but more 
broadly, challenge the spectacle of inevitability and remind ourselves that alternative futures are 
achievable. Of course, there are challenges in conducting this research. As Botturi (2021) points out 
in their research which asked children to draw the internet: “collecting evidence of children’s 
conceptualization is not easy” (Botturi, 2021, p. 38). But it is imperative to conduct this type of 
research to move beyond current understandings and practices with technologies, products, and 
their environments, and imagine and actualise a digital future where children’s perspectives are 
championed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
— Aleesha Rodriguez and Rebecca Ng 
6 
Can AI be an ethical collaborator in educational research? 
 
 
Figure 2: Deep dream generator prompt:  Can AI be an ethical collaborator in educational research?  
 
In this section we direct attention to the role of affect and emotion in technologically mediated 
research. The contribution stems from a Data Science X HASS speculative inquiry that started out by 
asking the question: What can SentiOneTM, an AI-based social listening tool, tell us about children's 
uptake of digital technologies during COVID-19 related school closures in Australia? We present an 
outcome of the inquiry, a protocol that was co-designed through a playtest of AI-based social 
listening tool, SentiOneTM and propose a hybrid computational-human method for working with AI 
that offers a computational attunement to affect and emotion. 
The inquiry sits within a larger project that came about in response to the extended 
lockdowns of 2020 and 2021 in Australia and Hungary.  The lockdowns – and the intensified 
engagement with networked digital technologies – caused everyday interactions of children, 
teachers, and parents to gain unexpected visibility, exposing important things about how we usually 
relate to teaching, learning and technology and drawing attention to the very real ways in which 
students, parents, teachers, and schools had to rethink their usual relationships, roles and power 
structures related to children’s digital lifeworlds.  
Livingstone and Blum-Ross (2020) make the point that parents’ hopes and fears act as a 
weather vane for what is going on in broader society arguing that "[t]alk or actions that seem to 
concern children's digital lives are, at heart, rooted in parents’ deeper hopes and fears for family life 
and their children's futures" (Livingstone & Blum-Ross, 2020, p.2). We share an intrigue with how 
digital transformations are commonly associated with intense emotion and want to better 
understand the relationship between emotions, affect, and their role in shaping individual and 
collective dispositions towards children's adoption of digital technologies. And, the digital 
7 
intensification that occurred in the lifeworlds of children during the pandemic presented an 
opportunity to do so. Our premise was: if the emotion-trails in data can be mapped, then we can 
form a deeper understanding of the effects of affective forces that shape dispositions (Threadgold, 
2020) towards children and digital technologies. We thus set out to co-design a computational 
protocol suitable for mapping affect and emotions across big datasets. Our explorations were 
underpinned by a desire to know the extent that social listening may be incorporated into such 
research and how we might story big data while keeping the deeply situated and granular in the 
picture. To keep small data in view, we conducted this ‘big data inquiry’ in conversation with the 
Pandemic Parenting project (the final of our four presentations) which gathered qualitative data 
over the same time-period as this project. 
Framed by a transindividual philosophy of affect, grounded in the work of Spinoza as taken 
up by Rosi Braidotti (2020), this inquiry is guided by two key concepts, 1) becoming-with AI and 2) 
cognitive assemblages; with both being central to the feminist materialist and assemblage thinking 
which orientates our approach to generating data through digital methods (here social listening). 
Affect, commonly understood in affect studies as the power to affect and be affected, is key to 
understanding the agency of non-human things including digital technologies, algorithms and data; 
all of which have the power to affect (e.g., capacitate / incapacitate) or be affected (e.g. become 
capacitated / incapacitated) by the people, technologies, ideas and things they come into proximity 
with. We argue that intentionally ‘becoming-with AI’ fosters ethically affirmative (Braidotti, 2020) 
data engagements characterised by criticality and creativity. This partially occurs through the 
acknowledgment of the productive force of SentiOneTM’s algorithms and partially through a 
commitment to doing the difficult work required to transform negative (e.g., incapacitating) 
relations when they arise in the research process. 
The significance of the guiding concept, ‘becoming-with’, is captured by Donna Haraway’s 
oft cited phrase, “[w]e become-with each other or not at all” (Haraway, 2016, p. 4). A radically 
relational undertaking, becoming-with aligns with an imperative “to develop different ways of 
caring, a more transversal, relational ethics that encompasses the non-humans” (Braidotti, 2020, 
p.466), with the non-humans including the algorithms and artificial intelligences that we increasingly 
share our lives and knowledge-making. This imperative Braidotti (ibid) speaks of involves a “shared 
ability to actualize and potentiate different possibilities.” For Amanda, Karen and I, this meant 
coming to see SentiOneTM as a collaborator (co-labourer). We learnt-with and played-with the social 
listening tool while avoiding algorithmic colonialism marked by extractive, fixed, normative data 
practices that position algorithms as “digital workhorses of the economy” (Goodman, 2020, p.50). 
A second guiding concept it that of ‘cognitive assemblages’. Following the work of Katherine 
Hayles (2017), we hold the position that cognition is distributed across conscious and non-conscious 
actors in responsive and adaptable systems or assemblages (e.g., the internet or a financial system 
or even a smart traffic light system in the CBD). We see affectivity as a crucial element of these 
assemblages, not only holding the people, things, algorithms, data, ideas and more in relation but 
also modulating the assemblage and the people, things, algorithms, data and ideas that are involved 
- either enhancing or constraining the power of cognition and action. These cognitive assemblages 
can include all forms of life, technical systems and more. The AI of SentiOneTM – which is in effect a 
bundle of algorithms – participates in cognitive processes through the cognitive assemblages in 
which they are involved which, in this case, is our social media research. Thinking about cognitive 
processes through the linked concepts of becoming-with and cognitive assemblages has far-reaching 
implications for educators because it firmly locates learning outside of individuals and emphasises 
8 
the relational, distributed and more-than-human elements of cognition. It also has far-reaching 
consequences for researchers because it surfaces ethical dimensions related to doing AI-based social 
research requiring serious consideration of how our interactions with technical systems shape the 
social-technical-material relations of the research and therefore the knowledge that is made. 
Data for this inquiry are largely comprised of news articles, reader comments and Twitter 
posts generated over the height of the pandemic in Australia (2020-22). Our premise was that news 
articles and affectively charged social media exchanges provide unique insights into children’s 
changing use of digital technologies and indeed the place of digital technologies in education more 
generally. The scale of the large dynamic dataset (10,000+ items) was behind our decision to adopt a 
computational approach for seeking and analysing data from different digital platforms. We chose to 
work with SentiOneTM because it crawled for the kind of data we were interested in and promised to 
highlight the affective flows via its sentiment analysis. Also, SentiOneTM has GDPR and Australian 
Privacy Principles compliance which makes ethical approvals necessary for this type of research in 
Australia to take place easier to navigate. 
So, what is SentiOneTM? In short, SentiOneTM (https://sentione.com) is an AI-based social 
listening ‘tool’ created for commercial purposes.  It builds and sends crawlers out onto social media 
platforms and specified websites to scrape data then, if asked, performs sentiment analysis. A highly 
attractive feature of SentiOneTM is that it affords an iterative macro and micro analyses with dynamic 
datasets through its interface. 
Our interest in SentiOneTM stemmed from its potential for analysing textual data and 
interactions over social networks and its alleged ability to do sentiment analysis – however, our 
expectations of SentiOneTM were much higher than the reality.  It was effective at crawling for and 
aggregating data from across the internet but did not do what we hoped it would do. Not only did 
commercial understandings of sentiment not match our philosophical understandings of affect and 
emotion, a closer look at the way it coded and sorted data showed all sorts of issues, bringing us 
back to the idea that AI-based tools are not always being ‘truthful’. These mistruths were created in 
a variety of ways: 
● some to do with search perimeters and parameters, 
● some to do with the lack of nuance/complexity in a commercial-grade sentiment analysis 
which relies on the positive-negative binary, 
● some to do with the degree to which news companies prevented crawlers from accessing 
their websites and user comments, 
● some to do with data instability, the limitations of crawlers and built-in errors in the API. 
Becoming implicated in what is known as a Gartner hype cycle 
(https://www.gartner.com/en/research/methodologies/gartner-hype-cycle) we started with inflated 
expectations of SentiOneTM. This persisted through the trough of disillusionment, and then out the 
other side as we found a way for the research and researchers to become-with SentiOneTM’s 
capabilities, relieving us of our frustrations and creating positive affinities with SentiOneTM.  The 
implications were that we had to rethink how we were working with SentiOneTM and seek work-
arounds – taking it off-piste – positioning it as collaborator in a more-than-human research team 
rather than ‘tool’ for us to use. The experience of doing so highlighted our unconscious allegiances 
to instrumentalism and the challenge of responding to the “need to develop practices for thinking 
about those forms of activity that are not caught by functionality, those which propose the possible-
but-not-yet, or that which is not-yet” (Haraway, 2019, n.p.). 
9 
If doing research in digital spaces with playmates like SentiOneTM, algorithms will participate 
in the knowledge-making, producing structuring forces with and in the cognitive assemblage and 
shaping the research process that generates new knowledge. To avoid algorithmic imperialism 
involving extractive, fixed, normative data practices - big ‘T’ truth-makers - we orientated ourselves 
towards capacitating practices characterised by criticality and creativity. And, to further sensitise 
ourselves to the politics of algorithmic infrastructures of digital AI-based research, we also adopted 
principles of data feminisms (D’Ignazio & Klein, 2020), noting the scope of this paper only allows us 
to speak directly to principles 3 and 7: 
 
1. Examine Power 
2. Challenge Power  
3. Elevate Emotion & Embodiment 
4. Rethink Binaries & Hierarchies 
5. Embrace Pluralism  
6. Consider Context  
7. Make Labour Visible 
 
 
 
Figure 4: Human-AI dataflows 
 
 
 
10 
An important aspect of our inquiry involved coming to a full understanding of acknowledging the 
significant hidden (human) labour in data-intensive, AI-based research, and the realities of Feminist 
data principle #7: Show your work. The screengrab image above is a diagram of the human-AI 
dataflows that came out of many months of coming to know the complex relationships between all 
the actors in the cognitive assemblage of our research collaborative. We will further discuss this in 
our symposium, however, to understand the data that the SentiOneTM algorithm was bringing to us, 
we also adopted an approach that data scientist Karen Thompson has begun to formalise as the 
“press all the buttons” methodology.  Without understanding how data is collected or ascribed value 
by an algorithm, researchers risk operating with a trust that is unfounded. It is critical to form a solid 
relationship with data central to the project. We did this work both collectively and privately. 
Collective work created opportunities to learn from each other and avoided duplicated effort. 
Private work enabled quieter path tracing and deeper focus. These interrogations were initially quite 
unstructured, we probed whatever took our attention, then we gradually increased focus on 
selected lines of inquiry.  Note-taking during these explorations is helpful because it is surprisingly 
easy to lose your way.  
Through this phase we began to understand the boundaries (perimeters) of the data 
landscape – what was transparent and easily understood (e.g. changing dates, search terms, 
websites to crawl), and what was ‘black-box’ or unavailable to us to change or learn more about (e.g. 
assignment of sentiment value within SentiOneTM). At the end of this phase, we understood how 
search terms created data, some of the limitations (we cannot pretend to know all), and we were 
able to draw a map of how to navigate or become-with SentiOneTM; a map that can be shared with 
new team members and helps remind future-us of our steps (Figure 4).   
Once satisfied with our data gathering process we introduced custom-made algorithms into 
the collaboration, to provide a more nuanced way of mapping affect and emotion in data. What 
arose was a computational attunement to affect. Figure 5 is a prototype of a hybrid human-AI ‘tool’ 
for mapping affect that was initially developed from a sample interview transcript, used instead of 
social media data because it reduced the complexity. The prototype was created by knitting together 
two python libraries, NRCLex (Mohammad & Turney, 2013) and PyPlutchik (Semeraro et al., 2021), 
into a computational script that, when run on textual data such as a transcript, forms a playable 
visualisation of the flow of sentiment together with the to and fro of emotions. These libraries 
provide a comprehensive lexicon of emotion-words (over 14,000) and are particularly promising 
because they make it possible to map different combinations of emotions and their intensities, 
including conflicting emotions, conveying the emotion-trails in the data with a high degree of 
complexity. The libraries are not problem free however, with documented bias present in the lexicon 
which reflect the predilections of the crowd who acted as the source (Zad et al., 2021) 
11 
 
Figure 5: Prototyping of a human-AI approach to mapping affect 
Much of programming is working with abstractions. Amanda needed to know that NRCLex would 
translate words into the related emotion or sentiment but was not concerned with analysing the ebb 
and flow of emotion that occurs as the conversation unfolded. To confirm the visualisations depicted 
in Figure 5 had an acceptable degree of accuracy, the interviewer who recorded sample interview 
transcripts cross-checked the visualisations against the computational coding (Figure 6) and their 
memory of the interview, reporting a surprisingly high degree of accuracy.  
 
Figure 6: Interviewer checks computational coding of transcript 
12 
Perhaps our human programmer’s interactions with data in the cognitive assemblage at hand were 
not dissimilar to our AI collaborator’s interactions, working with an expression of the experience that 
holds no meaning in and of itself. Amanda (human programmer) made sense of data through the 
visualisation of affective flows conveyed by petals of diagrammed emotion, and this sense-making 
was facilitated by the technological transformation of the data.  
Given the potential of AI-based social listening playmates like SentiOneTM for transforming 
how data are assembled and analysed, consideration of algorithms and algorithmic infrastructures is 
crucial. To assist in such endeavours, we offer some pointers to orientate hybrid AI-human research 
collaborations: 
 
● Keep a human in the loop but not in a way that ascribes to human exceptionalism. Instead, 
challenge transhumanist alliances with advanced capitalism. 
● Accept algorithms as entities that are powerful agents in the cognitive assemblages in which 
they participate but avoid technologically deterministic practices including those that 
promote techno heroism.  Instead, thinking with the notion of becoming-with, acknowledge 
the dynamic nature of archives – including Twitter data sets – and working with dataflows 
that can respond (e.g., response-able). 
● Approach generative AI as a collaborator or playmate. 
● Make room for speculative thinking to bring data science and critical inquiry together. 
● Work in the space between distant and close views of the data, shifting between looking for 
big data patterns and sense-checking with small data that contribute to these patterns. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
—Sarah Healy, Amanda Belton and Karen Thompson 
13 
The metaverse as a virtual site of research 
 
 
Figure 7: Deep dream generator prompt: The metaverse as a virtual site of research  
 
This paper ‘The metaverse as a virtual site of research’ is underpinned by following the questions: 
● How might we think differently with born digital and digitised data? What if we built new 
dataverses to help us see through data differently while reworlding data from site to cite?  
● What is important to retain and keep as a source of knowledge for future generations?  
● If digital data is a new cultural heritage of life, how can we ensure that it is not threatened or 
undervalued?  
● How can we leverage digital and virtual technologies to innovatively map and build research 
publics? 
● What role do virtual galleries and digital museums of research play in creating new worlds 
for future audiences? 
 
Creative educational researchers are faced with ongoing shifts in their ways of knowing, being and 
doing as the impact of COVID-19 continues to make an impact on scholarly processes and practices, 
as well as research translation and dissemination. Many continue to challenge what constitutes 
research as they strive for more nuanced understandings of how to co-construct new knowledges 
with communities. To do this they consider the future of digital data, heritage and curation 
(Cameron, 2021). As educational researchers seek out new places to present creative research and 
co-create stories to expand ways of knowing, they have encountered alternative, virtual and 
14 
immersive worlds that might be reimagined through advancing products and technologies. The 
innovative, virtual, and immersive have brought about new forms of dissemination to research 
teams in education that go beyond traditional academic publishing norms to consider impact in 
authentic and community-based sites beyond academia. This catalyst for change was spurred on by 
the extended pandemic lockdown period in Melbourne, Australia, which forced researchers to 
explore virtual worlds for exhibiting and disseminating their scholarly outputs as “data creativities” 
Spreadborough et al., 2022). 
The metho-pedagogies underpinning this research engage us in critical debates and issues 
regarding educational methodologies. To explore this, we present two research projects:  
 
1. An Arts Education imperative: New directions for sustainability 
2. Climate, Art and Digital Activisms  
 
As interdisciplinary collaborations of artists, scientists, data workers and digital placemakers, 
both projects take up a speculative approach to creative research, pushing the boundaries that 
surround digital methods, post-humanities, and immersive practices in educational research. We 
present the design and build of a meta-dataverse as research assemblage, constellation and digital 
research architecture to show what happens when education research goes ‘meta’. This is important 
because our work seeks to push inter- and transdisciplinary research in education through future-
casting (Rae & Coleman, 2021). Future-casting being a concept introduced to us by Australian 
Indigenous philosopher and scholar Claire G. Coleman (Rae & Coleman, 2021) as a form of 
speculative thinking, powerful because knowing about our future – in as much as it can be known – 
changes our present. We understand future-casting as an Australian species of SF, with SF being 
variously defined as Speculative Fabulations, Science Fictions, Speculative Facts, String Figures and 
So Forth (Haraway, 2016). 
Originally coined by Neal Stephenson in the 1992 science fiction novel Snow Crash, the term 
‘metaverse’ described a speculative iteration of the internet, where humans could be fully 
enmeshed in an online universe. Now a rising phenomenon in contemporary techno cultures and 
embraced by moviemakers speculating the possibilities, we do not (yet) have an overarching or 
universal metaverse system that approximates a parallel to the World Wide Web. What we have 
seen is the rise of the metaverse(s) in our techno-cultural zeitgeist exemplified by the rebranding of 
social network company formerly known as Facebook to Meta in October 2021, followed by their 
launch of the Horizon virtual social platforms (‘The Facebook Company Is Now Meta’, 2021). These 
developments suggest that the metaverse concept is gaining traction in prominence and possibility. 
Even through there is no singular vision of the metaverse for education, there is an opportunity to 
create sites for: 
● Collective encounter 
● Engaging, immersive exhibition 
● Repository and dissemination 
The possibilities we see for the metaverse as ‘a quasi-successor state to the mobile internet’ 
(Ball, 2021) is a rapidly emerging cultural and technosocial phenomena with deep potential for 
mobilising the creative act of research and knowledge mobilisation. As the metaverse gains 
prominence as both place and metaphor – a collaborative tool used to create immersive virtual 
realities – we argue the metaverse can be transformative, as a multimodal form of engagement and 
pedagogical site in educational research. 
15 
In this paper, we extend the collective theme to imagine how things could be radically 
different than they are today, and how we speculate on progress toward that imaginary world to 
activate change (Dunne & Raby, 2013) in educational research. The edu-metaverse of research sites 
has opened opportunities for these two projects to emerge as game changers in our practices at the 
Graduate School. As speculative a/r/tographers we work across a range of digital platforms: OMEKA, 
Figshare, Mozilla Hubs, Miro and more. We propose that these platforms and repositories might be 
sustainable digital methods for tackling research foci while enriching metho-pedagogical knowledge.  
With/in the metaverse, the space to practice is unbound by creative research traditions. It is 
a space for a/r/tists (Coleman, 2017) to play virtually and invite visitors as spectators to experience 
new ways of seeing, hearing, moving, and connecting with/in art and artist-research. Speculative 
a/r/tography (MacDonald, et al., 2022) is an innovative, speculative practice-related method that 
invites a participatory response through its design. As a methodological-pedagogical inquiry model, 
a/r/tographic mediation (Irwin, 2003) provokes both wondering and wandering in rhizomatic spaces, 
where non-literal, non-linear, non-verbal signs and meanings are co-created, shared and interpreted.  
 
 
Figure 8: Still image from the Metaverse Galleries Walkthrough, YouTube.  
First shown at ‘Small Data is Beautiful: Analytics, Art and Narrative’ symposium, February 2022. 
 
One way of rethinking the possibilities and opportunities for data work was to invite participants in 
the research team of ‘An Arts Education imperative: New directions for sustainability’ (Arts 
Education Imperatives, 2021) to send us a time capsule as creative scholarly output. We extended an 
invitation that stated 2041 arts education imperatives research: 
 
Congratulations, you are invited to contribute to the creation of an arts education research 
time capsule to capture an archive of your work. We invite you to send a pre-recorded 7 
minute time capsule video that tells the story of your research to be opened in 2041.  We 
asked the team to speculate and to think about what their legacy might be as they 
considered what people will come to know about their research in 2041.  
 
This project within a project explored the different ways that we might do digital and speculative 
educational research projects at Melbourne Graduate School of Education. Our speculative metho-
16 
pedagogies (Coleman & MacDonald, 2020) are driven by feminist data practices that have helped us 
reimagine, rethink and explore ways of doing data work differently. We think it is an important time 
for us to rethink what data is in arts based educational research; who produces data; how data is 
understood as practice and what practices we seek to explore. It is inherent in our work, as 
a/r/tographers who come together to engage in shared inquiries, act as critical friends, and present 
their collective provocative works to others (Irwin, 2003).  
This led us into thinking about what methods and pedagogies we need post pandemic as we 
face an endemic future. The video data was the genesis for the data scientist, Amanda Belton and 
digital artist-in-residence, Jessica Williams to analyse and creatively generate new digital artefacts to 
be disseminated in the feedback loop of scholarly outputs within the curated exhibition. The model 
of co-design with a digital artist in residence and data scientist created possibilities for metho-
pedagogies driven by feminist data practices to shift the project to make new pathways for artists 
and researchers through a metaverse of virtual spaces.  
The 3D exhibition was designed on the Mozilla Hubs (see Figure 9) open-source metaverse 
platform. Whilst Mozilla Hubs is not yet optimized for educational/scholarly purposes, it’s an easy 
platform to build virtual worlds in without needing coding skills. Hubs is VR headset enabled, but this 
isn’t mandatory for viewing scenes. Users are able to access the Hubs platform via their web 
browser and are represented by an avatar once inside the Hubs scene. We set up two scenes in the 
Mozilla Hubs exhibition. First, visitors enter the Enculturation Lobby that houses a portal (styled like 
a stargate) that leads to an Indoor Gallery. The Lobby featured a video introduction to the 
overarching research project and other ephemera, like gifs, posters and illustrations. This space was 
designed to prime and orient audiences to the virtual world- how to move through the space, how 
to click and interact with objects. Hubs permitted unexpected encounters with the data. Our visitors 
were able to upload images, documents or temporarily ‘graffiti’ with drawings in the space. Live chat 
and live streaming of audiovisuals (with webcam and microphone) made it possible for audiences to 
interact collectively and spontaneously. For example, one of our contributing research teams chose 
an avatar that danced relentlessly throughout their visit- an unexpected, but entertaining incident. 
Against a backdrop of pandemic-related disruption and separation, our team of researchers 
and creatives found themselves seeking to create an online environment that would allow us to 
gather to view our research data, collectively, just as if we were getting together at a physical gallery 
space. We wanted to invite audiences to immerse and interact with our exhibition in a generative 
way. We wanted to store, disseminate and cite our data by networking a multitude of sites. As a 
result, we linked other platforms to our 3D environment, including the Figshare open access 
repository and the Omeka web-publishing platform to design an edu-metaverse.  
The edu-metaverse helped us reimagine, rethink, and explore ways of doing data work 
differently. From here we began to consider the implication of project 1 and to co-making in digital 
sites with participants as co-makers and collaborative curators. We shifted the project to speculate 
and play with the following questions: 
1.  What research might we need for this rapidly changing world? 
2.  What research do we need to contribute to a new ecosystem of learning? 
3.  What research do we need to do to transform education for our climate futures?’ 
This next iteration built on our ecology model, via the tools and sites of digital galleries, curation and 
presentation to further an interlinked, cartographic understanding of the metaverse as an 
educational research ecology. To achieve this, we proposed new directions for a/r/tography with the 
‘metaverse as research ecology’.  Connectivist, George Siemens defines an ecology as a dynamic, 
17 
rich, and continually evolving system (Siemens, 2005). To explore this, we invited others to create 
new datasites and build a new metaverse of sites of dissemination within the ecology, so we could 
all immerse ourselves in searching for knowledge, information and derive meaning collaboratively. 
We sought to involve opportunities for digital platforms as partners in research, and speculative 
modes of making into sustainable new systems for educations in The Climate, Art, and Digital 
Activisms Festival of Ideas (Melbourne/Narrm 21-23 November, 2022). Here we (Healy and 
Coleman) brought together local community members, interdisciplinary artists, scientists and 
educators in Melbourne for a unique conversation.  
The research team decided to flip the script by opening the conversation to local community 
members, interdisciplinary artists, scientists and educators. The festival program, designed to create 
meaningful opportunities to contribute, connect and create community to meet the challenges we 
face. The urgency of the climate crisis connected world media, activists, politicians, policymakers, 
scientists and educators together for @COP27 in November 2022. Yet many people at home and in 
the local community didn’t get to participate in these talks. As citizens, we are often told what to 
think about climate change and the threat of ecological collapse, but don’t often get a chance to 
explore how we can take shared action for better futures. This research was developed because we 
think everyone has a role to play in acting on climate change; no single group of people or 
technological advancement is going to save us. Instead of waiting to be told what to do, the team 
decided that now, more than ever, they need to have conversations across generations, 
communities and institutional boundaries to create solutions together. So, we built a new Mozilla 
Hubs with digital artist in residence, Neda Sajadi following the same model of co-design. This 
metaverse was designed to operate as a digital site for two-way knowledge exchange and to teach 
within. This virtual exhibition metaverse space had a different remit, it was developed to house 
creative artifacts from the programs of research across several sites and ultimately teach within an 
immersive environment about climate catastrophe and climate crisis.  
 
 
Figure 9: “Mozilla Hubs Thumbnail,” digital artist-in-residence Neda Sajadi  
in the Climate, Art and Digital Activisms Hubs.  
18 
 
This Hubs space and edu-metaverse that surrounds the artefacts exists as an ongoing exhibition, 
virtual learning and development of an intercultural climate futures curriculum which allows 
modifications as the project expands. This practice of “Knowing is a direct material engagement, a 
practice of intra-acting with the world as part of the world in its dynamic material configuring, its 
ongoing articulation. The entangled practices of knowing and being are material practices” (Barad, 
2007, p.379). Within these material practices we enable interaction via avatars, where viewers can 
engage with the artworks as they share their ideas with one another and add on the works which are 
present in the space.  
 
 
 
Figure 10: “Mozilla Hubs Thumbnail,” Artist-in-residence Cassie Truong Exhibition  
in the Climate, Art and Digital Activisms Hubs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
—Kathryn Coleman, Amanda Belton, Jessica Laraine Williams, and Neda Sajadi 
19 
Pandemic Parenting in the Metaverse 
 
 
Figure 11: Deep dream generator prompt: Pandemic Parenting in the Metaverse  
 
Our showcase of Pandemic Parenting in the Metaverse as a virtual site of research demonstrates 
that educational researchers can expand their capacity to do digital scholarship and successfully 
extend their research ecology into the metaverse without prior experience of doing so. Our research 
team achieved this by adopting a digital artist in residence model of co-design. This model, 
developed by Kathryn Coleman (as discussed above), was adapted for our large collaborative 
research project which explored children’s and families’ experiences of screen media use across 
seven countries during the COVID-19 pandemic. 
This style of work engages the concept of ‘generative digital scholarship’ as “scholarship that 
builds ongoing, ever-growing digital environments even as it is used” (Ayers 2013, p. 34). The 
showcase is thus positioned as a type of generative scholarship that, as Ayers (ibid) has put it, “does 
not claim to have the last word but, rather, to be a way to open scholarship to new ideas from many 
directions”. Crucially, it makes it possible for researchers to provide an account of the research to 
participants who may not be interested in reading academic publications. We argue this is significant 
because it provides a way to democratise research and elicit critical feedback in new spaces that 
cross geographical and temporal boundaries.  
Formally known as ‘Children, Media, and Parenting in the COVID-19 Pandemic’ the Pandemic 
Parenting project grew from a single site into a global study led by Professor Rebekah Willett from 
the University of Wisconsin-Madison and supported by the Australian Research Council Centre of 
Excellence for the Digital Child. The study involved 112 parents located in Australia, Canada, China, 
Colombia, South Korea, UK, and the US. The parents generated digital data through 1) an online pre-
interview survey, 2) an online interview and, 3) a collaborative search for a digital image that 
resonated with their experiences of the pandemic. The Mozilla Hub space which houses 'Pandemic 
Parenting in the Metaverse' Collaborative Research Exhibition, 2022 was created as both a response 
20 
to and curation of this empirical material gathered over the course of the Pandemic Parenting 
project. It was built in collaboration with digital artist in residence, Jessica Williams (Jess), to co-
create an immersive experience of multimodal data that could be accessed across geographical 
locations and time zones. Visitors to the metaverse appear to others as avatars and join Jess (artist 
in residence) and all that comprises the metaverse.  
Featuring a video walk-through of the exhibit, this showcase reimagines how the form of a 
research output (e.g., a purpose-built metaverse) interplays with its substance (e.g., the Pandemic 
Parenting data) to better show how social, technological, material, and affective forces shape the 
digital ‘truths’ experienced, internalized and negotiated by families, and prompt consideration of the 
conditions for transformative change to occur across a variety of sites of digitally mediated 
knowledge-making and truth telling (Table 1). Digital in nature, the video walk-through is not a 
simple representation of data. Instead, it maintains a materialism that is both affective and bodily, 
achieved through what Haraway (2019, n.p.) sees as a ‘thickness of worlding’ involved in ‘situated 
meaning-making’. As Haraway further explains, “It’s not embodied, as if it were stuck in a body. It’s 
bodily and it’s bodying, it’s worlding.” The following transcript and screenshots come from the video 
walk-through narrated by Jess. Her narration provides astute insights into both the data and the 
analytic contribution that a digital artist in residence makes to research. 
 
Table 1: Stills from video walk-through of the exhibit (https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.22107767.v2) 
 
 
When visitors enter the metaverse space, they start 
from the end of a corridor. We organized three main 
exhibition rooms that have overarching themes 
relating to the experiences of parenting during the 
pandemic. They are bigger spaces with aggregated 
visual and transcript data shown together in the 
form of image quilts. These are on the right-hand 
side of the corridor. On the left-hand side, there are 
three smaller rooms designed to house focal 
experiences and showcase more specific themes. 
This first big room is titled ‘Everything is fine?’  
 
This room is the first of the three main exhibition 
spaces. In this space, we wanted to convey a sense of 
ambiguity, ambivalence, and a veneer of having 
everything under control. In response to the image 
prompts given at the interview, parents and 
caregivers fed back to us with a sense of feeling 
resigned to their situation. There was a sense of 
doing the very best that they could, but also seeking 
reassurance that their decisions were ‘okay’, and 
also acknowledging that for some people, everything 
was fine. 
21 
 
Walking down the corridor, we move from this sense 
that ‘everything is fine’ into what has become the 
‘new norm’, a brave new world where the pandemic 
is well and truly part of daily life.  
 
In this room, we wanted to convey a sense of 
exhaustion and guilt, a loss of control, a lack of 
surety and how to parent; a sense of feeling trapped 
by never-ending cycles of isolation and of children, 
families, and caregivers being forced into a situation 
that was less than ideal. In this room, we wanted to 
conjure the menace of claustrophobia: drowning in 
overwhelming circumstances, with juggling balls 
that hang in the air, just about to drop, but they 
never do. The windows open onto blocked-up walls 
with no exit, and the infinity symbol here suggests a 
continuous cycle of despair. 
 
The last of the three main rooms suggests frenetic 
multitasking with a large icon towering over the 
proceedings. There is administrative detritus, the 
kitchen and the office setting barely separated from 
one another. There is no roof and no ceiling to the 
demands being placed on families, the school 
seating looming closer than ever, hovering above. 
22 
 
Now on to the smaller focal rooms. We had a couple 
that were sealed off - just as many households 
needed to quarantine within their own domestic 
settings to contain family members that might need 
to be isolated from the broader household. The next 
room is themed around family tension. In this room, 
we wanted to convey a sense of family tension 
around household rules, such as sharing limited 
screen time, or trying to demarcate space away from 
screens, which tended, of course, to be an imperfect 
experience in a lot of cases. 
 
For our respondents, some gave up on the rules, 
some were more unsure of how to move forward, or 
whether or not their approach was the right one. We 
wanted to show a sense of things not functioning as 
one would hope through the glitch created here by 
installing multiple mirrors in this room.  
 
The second focal room is called ‘it's time’. In this 
room, you will see and hear multiple clocks ticking in 
a disorienting fashion, speaking to how time in the 
home was significantly disrupted during lockdowns 
in pandemic.  
 
The final focal room is built based on the theme of 
family togetherness. This room was about 
productivity, being playful, and having creative 
uses/outcomes from interacting with technology and 
screen media. The activities that people did during 
the pandemic included things like exercising using 
screens and YouTube videos, seeking out information 
online about cooking and picking up other hobbies, 
or finding ways to escape with the family via screen 
media and play- such as creating videos and using 
filters. 
 
 
 
23 
What are the implications of recent technological interventions, like the ‘metaverse’, for educational 
research/ers? And, how do digital research ecologies shape how knowledge is made, accessed, and 
mobilised both within and beyond the life of a research project? Our interest in exploring Pandemic 
Parenting data ‘in’ the metaverse comes at a time in digital scholarship when a great many research 
outputs, such as scholarly articles and books, “bear little mark of the digital age in which they are 
created” (Ayers 2013, p. 26). Yet the relationship between digital research infrastructures and 
knowledge-making can no longer be ignored (Gogoi, Boro & Das, 2022). Digitally assembling, 
creating, and curating visual and interview data affords the build of a virtual research site that is 
orientated by ‘generative scholarship’ and, we would add, generative data analysis and generative 
research engagement. The creative and designerly affordances of the metaverse intersect with 
visitors’ encounters with and responses to audio and visual data from the project, making it possible 
for research engagement and creation to occur as concurrent activities.  The site becomes a method 
to document and generate new insights (and data) whilst creating a virtual site for engaging diverse 
publics in the affective and embodied dimensions of data that may otherwise be lost in thematically 
coded transcripts from the online interviews. It does this by inviting audiences into a virtual world of 
pandemic parenting marked by a gamut of emotions related to negotiating children’s intensified 
uptake of screen media while meeting the often unrealistic expectations of schools and workplaces. 
Within the broader context of the scholarship of digital research and knowledge-making, we 
also align our practice with the Open Access (OA) movement and its aim of democratising research 
through principles of integrity, transparency, and accessibility. Such an alignment coupled with FAIR 
data principles and data feminisms (D’Ignazio & Klein 2020) makes Mozilla Hubs a suitable platform 
for building an immersive virtual research exhibit but also presents new challenges. Yet, we also 
invite our audience to critically think about the challenges and potential pitfalls of engaging with 
digital methods in research. Technological glitches could happen which may compromise the quality 
of digital scholarship. The platformization of digital (research) infrastructures like the Mozilla Hubs 
brings into question the persistence of the virtual sites of research, as well as the ethics of data 
ownership and storage. Who owns the data that are uploaded to the digital platforms and how they 
are used in the long run? Moreover, the various forms of ‘thresholds’ created by these platforms 
may exclude people without the digital access and know-how from engaging with the research 
output. While the purpose of such digital scholarship practices is to bring down the barriers for 
public audiences, new boundaries might be set up which could impede some people from accessing 
and benefiting from the research project. 
The video walk-through of the exhibit described above was created to address some of the 
above problems. It acts as an easily accessible and persistent digital artifact to be archived in 
Figshare (an online, open access repository that makes research outputs citable, sharable and 
discoverable). 
Pandemic Parenting in the Metaverse reimagines how the form of a research output (e.g., a 
purpose-built metaverse) interplays with its substance (e.g., the Pandemic Parenting data) to better 
show how social, technological, material, and affective forces shape the digital ‘truths’ experienced, 
internalized and negotiated by families, and prompt consideration of the conditions for 
transformative change to occur across a variety of digitally mediated knowledge-making settings. In 
this sense the space becomes 1) an analytic strategy, 2) an exhibition of data, 3) a mode of 
knowledge mobilisation, and 4) more data. 
 
—Jessica Laraine Williams, Xinyu (Andy) Zhao, Sarah Healy, and Rebekah Willett 
24 
Together these presentations demonstrate the power of combining data science with philosophy, 
artistry, co-design, and educational research through interdisciplinary collaborations – collaborations 
which have folded in and out of each other as ideas, methods and even people have travelled.  
 
 
Acknowledgements 
We acknowledge the Traditional Owners of the stolen land on which we practice, research, teach and learn. We 
offer respect to all Aboriginal and Torres Strait Elders, past and present. In the spirit of reconciliation we 
acknowledge the Traditional Custodians of Country throughout Australia and their continuing connections to 
land, sea, sky and community. 
This paper is presented as part of the Australian Association for Research in Education (AARE) Representative 
Symposium at AERA2023. We acknowledge the support of our work by AARE through the Representative 
Symposium scheme.  
The Dreams of Digital Spaces Representative Symposium is a collaboration between ARC Centre of Excellence 
for the Digital Child researchers, Melbourne Data Analytic Platform data scientists and Melbourne Graduate 
School of Education artists, researchers and teachers. Aleesha Rodriguez, Rebecca Ng, Jessica Laraine Williams, 
Andy Zhao, Rebekah Willett and Sarah Healy would like to acknowledge the support of this work by the 
Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence for the Digital Child.  
Sarah Healy, Kathryn Coleman, Jessica Laraine Williams, Neda Sajadi, Amanda Belton would like to 
acknowledge the support of this work by the Melbourne Graduate School of Education (MGSE), MGSE An Arts 
Education imperative: New directions for sustainability Researcher Development Award 2021, Melbourne Data 
Analytics Platform (MDAP) Collaboration, and The Climate, Art, and Digital Activisms Festival of Ideas 
University of Melbourne Dyason Fellowship, AARE Joint SIG Funding 2022 and SWISP, an interdisciplinary 
research collab based in Narrm, Melbourne.  
 
References 
Anderson, B., Aitken, S., Bacevic, J., Callard, F., Chung, K. D., Coleman, K. S., Hayden Jr, R.F., Healy, S., 
Irwin, R.L., Jellis, T., Jukes, J., Khan, S., Marotta, S., Seitz,D.K., Snepvangers, K., Staples, A., 
Turner, C., Tse, J., Watson,  M. & Wilkinson, E. (2022). Encountering Berlant part 1: Concepts 
otherwise. The Geographical Journal, 181(1), 117-142. https://doi.org/10.1111/geoj.12494 
Arts Education Imperatives. (2021). Introduction to the new directions in sustainability project. 
Omeka. https://omeka.cloud.unimelb.edu.au/arts-education-imperatives/  
Ayers, E. L. (2013). Does digital scholarship have a future? Educause Review, 48(4), 24-26. 
https://er.educause.edu/articles/2013/8/does-digital-scholarship-have-a-future  
Ball, M. (2021, June 29). Framework for the metaverse, The Metaverse Primer. 
https://www.matthewball.vc/all/forwardtothemetaverseprimer  
Barad, K. (2007). Meeting the Universe Halfway: Quantum Physics and the Entanglement of Matter 
and Meaning. Duke University Press. 
Botturi, L. (2021). "Draw the internet": A visual exploration of how children imagine an everyday 
technology. Journal of Media Literacy Education, 13(3), 35-48. 
Braidotti, R. (2020). “We” are in this together, but we are not one and the same. Journal of 
Bioethical Inquiry, 17(4), 465-469. 
Cameron, F. R. (2021). The future of digital data, heritage and curation in a more-than-human world. 
Routledge.  
25 
Coleman, K.S. (2017). An a/r/tist in wonderland: Exploring identity, creativity and digital portfolios as 
a/r/tographer. Ph.D. dissertation, Melbourne Graduate School of Education, University of 
Melbourne, Australia. http://www.artographicexplorations.com  
Coleman, K. & MacDonald, A. (2020). What are artists and art educators teaching us about how we 
can conceive and deliver teacher professional learning into the future? In R.E. Ferdig, E. 
Baumgartner, R. Hartshorne, R. Kaplan-Rakowski and C. Mouza (Eds)., Teaching, Technology, 
and Teacher Education During the COVID-19 Pandemic: Stories from the Field. Association for 
the Advancement of Computing in Education.  
De', R., Pandey, N., & Pal, A. (2020). Impact of digital surge during Covid-19 pandemic: A viewpoint 
on research and practice. International Journal of Information Management, 55, 102171. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2020.102171 
D'ignazio, C., & Klein, L. F. (2020). Data feminism. MIT press. 
Dunne, A., & Raby, F. (2013). Speculative Everything: Design, Fiction, and Social Dreaming. MIT Press.  
Gogoi, G., Boro, B., & Das, M. (2022). Digital Scholarship in Humanities: The Agile Way. Available at 
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=4229088  
Goode, L. (2018). Life, but not as we know it: AI and the popular imagination. Culture Unbound, 
10(2), 185-207. 
Goodman, A. (2020). The secret life of algorithms: Speculation on queered futures of neurodiverse 
analgorithmic feeling and consciousness. Transformations, 34, p. 49-70. 
https://doi.org/10.26181/5f9fa540aaecd 
Haraway, D. J. (2016). Staying with the trouble: Making kin in the Chthulucene. Duke University 
Press. 
Haraway, D. (2019, July 12). A giant bumptious litter: Donna Haraway on truth, technology, and 
resisting extinction. Logic Magazine, 9. https://logicmag.io/nature/a-giant-bumptious-litter/ 
Hary, E. (2018, March 22). Insights: Scott Smith. Medium. https://medium.com/design-
friction/insights-scott-smith-354d1b6cffd6#.jvxa0vu8c  
Hayles, N. K. (2017). Unthought. University of Chicago Press. 
Hood, E. & Kraehe, A. (2017). Creative matter: New materialism in art education research, teaching, 
and learning. Art Education, 70, 32-38. https://doi-
org.ezproxy.library.wisc.edu/10.1080/00043125.2017.1274196  
Irwin, R. L. (2003). Towards an aesthetic of unfolding in/sights through curriculum. Journal of the 
Canadian Association for Curriculum Studies, 1(2), 63-78. 
Jasanoff, S., & Kim, S. H. (2009). Containing the atom: Sociotechnical imaginaries and nuclear power 
in the United States and South Korea. Minerva, 47(2), 119–146. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11024-009-9124-4  
Jasanoff, S., & Kim, S. H. (2013). Sociotechnical imaginaries and national energy policies. Science as 
Culture, 22(2), 189-196. 
Jasanoff, S. & Kim., S. (Eds.) (2015). Dreamscapes of modernity: Sociotechnical imaginaries and the 
fabrication of power. University of Chicago Press. 
Livingstone, S., & Blum-Ross, A. (2020). Parenting for a digital future: How hopes and fears about 
technology shape children’s lives. Oxford University Press. 
MacDonald, A., Coleman, K., Healy, S. & Diener, M. (2022). How does pedagogical slipperiness 
enable speculation in/for teacher professional learning? In E. Baumgartner (Ed.), A 
Retrospective of Teaching, Technology, and Teacher Education During the COVID-19 
Pandemic (1 ed., pp. 45-49) Association for the Advancement of Computing in Education. 
26 
Markham, A. (2021). The limits of the imaginary: Challenges to intervening in future speculations of 
memory, data, and algorithms. New Media & Society, 23(2), 382–405. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1461444820929322  
Mohammad, S. & Turney, P. (2013). Crowdsourcing a word-emotion association lexicon 
Computational Intelligence, 29(3), 436-465. 
OHCHR. (n.d.). General comment No. 25 (2021) on children’s rights in relation to the digital 
environment. https://www.ohchr.org/en/documents/general-comments-and-
recommendations/general-comment-no-25-2021-childrens-rights-relation  
Plowman, L. (2020). Digital Play. https://www.de.ed.ac.uk/project/digital-play  
Rae, J. & Coleman, C. G. (2021). Refugium. Melbourne: Centre for Reworlding. 
Robinson, A. (2017). Technology: He wrote the future. Nature, 541, 286–287. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/541286a 
Roose, K. (2023, January 13). Don’t ban ChatGPT in cchools. Teach with it. The New York Times. 
https://www.nytimes.com/2023/01/12/technology/chatgpt-schools-teachers.html  
Semeraro, A., Vilella, S., & Ruffo, G. (2021). PyPlutchik: Visualising and comparing emotion-
annotated corpora. PLOS ONE 16(9): e0256503. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0256503 
Sicart, M. A. (2020). Playing software: The role of the ludic in the software society. Information, 
Communication & Society. https://doi.org/10.1080/1369118X.2020.1764078 
Siemens, G. (2005, September 2). Designing ecosystems versus designing learning [Msg 28]. Message 
posted to http://connectivism.ca/blog/ecosystem 
Sovacool, B. K., & Hess, D. J. (2017). Ordering theories: Typologies and conceptual frameworks for 
sociotechnical change. Social Studies of Science, 47(5), 703-750. 
Spreadborough, K., Cochrane, T., Glasser, S., Sweeney, D., Harris, J., Belton, A., Coleman, K., Melzack, 
G., & Fitzgerald, E. (2022). CO-llaborative VI-rtual D-esign: A collaborative autoethnography 
on conducting exclusively online, data-Led dollaborations in the creative industries. 
Qualitative Inquiry, 28(3–4), 403–419. https://doi.org/10.1177/10778004211039165 
Stephenson, N. (1992). Snowcrash. Bantam Books.  
Taylor, C. (2003). Modern social imaginaries. Duke University Press. 
Threadgold, S. (2020). Bourdieu and affect: Towards a theory of affective affinities. Policy Press.  
Zad, S., Jimenez, J., & Finlayson, M. (2021, August). Hell hath no fury? Correcting bias in the NRC 
emotion lexicon. In Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on Online Abuse and Harms (WOAH 
2021), 102–113. https://aclanthology.org/2021.woah-1.11  
 
