Exploration of the Future of Co-Creative Systems Through  
Collaborative Speculative Design Practices 
Chiara Ullstein 
Kyoto Design Lab 
Kyoto Institute of Technology 
Matsugasaki, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8585 JAPAN 
chiara.ullstein@gmail.com 
Michel Hohendanner 
Kyoto Design Lab 
Kyoto Institute of Technology 
Matsugasaki, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8585 JAPAN 
michelhohendanner@gmail.com 
Abstract 
Technology strongly influences societal systems, and 
likewise societal perceptions influence the implementa-
tion of specific technologies as well as their future de-
velopment. When it comes to co-creative systems, ques-
tions arise on how these systems will fit into human so-
cial systems. Therefore, a broad and pluralistic discourse 
about the future of co-creative systems and their societal 
impact should be aimed for. Our research collects crucial 
questions from the realm of co-creative literature and 
embeds them in a collaborative speculative design 
framework. Firstly, the framework aids collaboration be-
tween interdisciplinary speculators when imagining fu-
ture scenarios about co-creative systems together. And 
second, it supports the generation of visual speculative 
products that can serve as a starting point for a broad ex-
ternal audience to discuss the developments and impacts 
of co-creative technology on possible futures in a plural-
istic manner. 
 Introduction 
Creativity is broadly perceived as one of the things that 
makes us human. Therefore, the possibility for an artificial 
intelligence (AI) driven system to be creative is considered 
as one of the frontiers of AI development, but also a feared 
threshold for its critics. (Colton and Wiggins 2012) The 
thought that computational systems are not able to, or should 
be excluded from, performing creative acts is reflected in an 
unconscious human bias found in the assessment of artefacts 
created by computational creative systems (Moffat and 
Kelly 2006). Furthermore, the seemingly general unease 
with AI systems within society only adds to this bias (Moffat 
and Kelly 2006). This unease could not only create skepti-
cism towards the beneficial use of AI systems, but also limit 
positive future visions. 
Because co-creative systems may have a great influence 
on the creativity of laymen and professionals (Kantosalo, 
Toivanen, Xiao, and Toivonen 2014), and potentially also 
lead to a transformation of creative industries as well as cul-
tural norms and value systems, it could be valuable to have 
discussions on the future of co-creative systems; Discus-
sions that include not only researchers from the field, but 
also societal actors who will be equally affected. In this pa-
per, we present a method to collectively reflect on and dis-
cuss about the status quo as well as the future of co-creative 
systems and generate visual discussion contributions. 
 We rely on the definition of creative systems by Karim, 
Maher, Davis and Grace (2019, p.17): “Creative systems are 
computational systems that either model human creativity in 
some manner or are designed to support and inspire creativ-
ity.” Within the field of creative systems, different ap-
proaches, namely creativity support tools, autonomous cre-
ative systems and co-creativity systems, can be differenti-
ated (Karim et al. 2019). This paper specifically focusses on 
societal questions regarding the future of co-creative sys-
tems. Co-creative systems describe proactive (Liapis, Yan-
nakakis, Alexopoulos and Lopes 2016) collaborations be-
tween computers and humans on a creative task in real time, 
whereby the creativity of both agents is mutually influenced 
and enriched (Davis, Hsiao, Popova, and Magerko 2015). 
 With the development of the research field of computa-
tional creativity and the increase in autonomy of computa-
tional systems, many societal and philosophical questions 
relevant to co-creative systems stem from the approach of 
autonomous creative systems, which can lie the basis for the 
computational counterpart in co-creative systems. Looking 
at a simplified co-creative environment, the human and the 
computational system form the co-creative unit. This unit is 
embedded in a social system (society) with its norms and 
values. The creator or the programmer has influence on the 
computational system. Societal questions arise at all possi-
ble interrelations of these entities. In the following section, 
we will first raise societal and philosophical questions be-
fore presenting our method for the exploration of the future 
of co-creative systems. 
Societal and Philosophical Questions 
A crucial factor when it comes to the assessment of creativ-
ity of computational systems is the question of creative au-
tonomy. In order for this concept to be enabled, it is essen-
tial to integrate a certain amount of self-awareness and, 
therefore, the ability to “observe and assess its own 
performance” (Ackerman, Goel, Johnson, Jordanous, Leon, 
Perez y Perez, Toivonen, and Ventura 2017, p.5) into the 
computational system. This allows the system to evaluate its 
predefined or learned system standard in order to assess and 
compare its actions and outputs accordingly. Furthermore, 
the ability to adapt this standard, if necessary, needs to be 
integrated into the computational system in order for it to 
gain autonomy. (Ackerman et al. 2017) This raises the ques-
tion on whether the ability of autonomous systems to change 
without direct human interference is equal to the idea of au-
tonomy (Jennings 2010) and whether it is accepted as such 
by the human collaborator in the co-creative system. 
In addition, the assessment of its current system standards 
by a computational system is directly linked to the social 
setting of the environment, where the system is embedded. 
This is not only because the initial system standards origi-
nate from a human creator, but because they must be aligned 
with societal norms and values beyond the programmer-sys-
tem relationship (Jennings 2010). This is extended further 
when it comes to co-creative systems, where the user and 
the computational system potentially influence the percep-
tion of each other constantly (Cunha et al. 2019) and thereby 
also the evaluation standard. 
 Related to the change of its standards by the computa-
tional system, is the potential realignment of norms within 
a society if an algorithm’s performance is envied by the col-
laborator or an observer. The comparison of the system’s 
abilities to one’s own or to what is broadly perceived as 
good practice, may lead human beings to challenge their 
performance. Eventually, this arises normative discussions 
about the quality or creativeness of a human work (Pettee, 
Shimmin, Duhaime, and Vidrin 2019). This constellation 
raises questions on the influence of societal standards and 
value systems on the relationship of co-creative system col-
laborators and vice versa the influence of the relationship on 
societal norms and values. Furthermore, also questions of 
equality of actors within the co-creative system relation-
ship referring to the influential power or importance of one 
collaborating actor are touched. 
 The latter topic has also been mentioned in the context of 
creative computational systems outside the co-creative 
realm. For instance, the pioneer Harold Cohen (1988) stated 
that the creation of art works of his computational system 
AARON is bound to language and representational determi-
nations made by himself. While AARON generated art-
works autonomously, the creative computational system 
was not “an artist on its own right” (Cohen, P. 2016, p.65). 
Cohen perceived himself as the real artist and retained con-
trol by limiting AARON’s level of autonomy (Cohen, P. 
2016). Even if the creators of computational systems for co-
creative settings decide to grant unlimited autonomy to the 
machine, the question of authorship of the resulting co-cre-
ative work remains. While the latter refers to authorship 
rights between an autonomous computational agent and its 
creator, in co-creative systems the question of authorship 
should also be referred to the human-machine collaborators. 
Whereas shared creative responsibility over the generated 
artifact was observed in co-creative systems (Kantosalo, 
Toivanen, Xiao, and Toivonen 2014), different scales of in-
teraction (Maher 2012) and different roles, such as control 
over task, speaker or outcome (Novick and Sutton 1997), of 
the co-creators can be identified. 
 Finally, it has been discussed by Colton, Pease and Saun-
ders (2018) that a computational system’s lack of authen-
ticity regarding authorial intention and the meaning of a cre-
ative artifact will limit its creative potential. When it comes 
to societal reception of the creations of co-creative systems, 
the question arises whether the human influence balances 
the computational system’s lack of authenticity or whether 
the computational system’s lack of authenticity diminishes 
the authenticity of the final creative outcome regardless of 
the human influence. 
Collaborative Speculative Design Practices 
The following section presents our own speculative design 
approach and provides a framework to conduct 1.5-day 
workshops. Speculative design supports the exploration of 
uncertain technological futures and uses the reasoning about 
such futures as a medium for speculation: e.g. to think about 
the future of co-creative systems and their prospective soci-
etal impact. Due to the uncertainty of future developments, 
information gaps emerge. These gaps are closed by making 
assumptions that facilitate the conception of future scenar-
ios. (Dunne and Raby 2013; Malpass 2017) The process of 
speculation decouples the imagination of future scenarios 
from specialized knowledge bases and allows an interdisci-
plinary group to generate ideas collectively, speculate on a 
more even level of knowledge and, thereby, integrates di-
verse perspectives into the ideation phase of the scenario. 
The result of the presented approach is the generation of a 
visualized product that transports the discussed and concep-
tualized future scenario.  
 Speculative design practices provide ample opportunity 
for exploring the future of co-creative systems. Indeed, 
speculative design aims to have an effect beyond the actual 
design of visual speculative artifacts, to initiate discussions 
about possible future scenarios (Dunne and Raby 2013; 
Malpass 2017). This can be achieved by using in-depth dis-
cussion settings, such as a workshop format, as well as by 
presenting the results to a broader audience. For the latter 
purpose the visualized products may serve as a starting point 
for subsequent discussions with a broad audience. 
 Our framework covers the collaborative speculative de-
sign process from ideation to conception of a future scenario 
for the visualization of a representative speculative product, 
through an in-depth discussion styled workshop format. Be-
cause the visualization of conceived products is a crucial 
part of the approach, at least one designer per workshop 
group should take part. The workshop can be conducted ei-
ther in an offline or online setting. The framework is pro-
vided under the CC license on www.perfectfuturede-
sign.com and was validated by conducting two workshops 
on the topic of the future of the digital public sphere (results 
accessible at aforementioned website). The framework 
applied to the context of co-creative systems contains the 
following three phases:  
 In the first phase, the participants learn about the co-cre-
ative systems and the applied speculative design method. In 
the second phase, the participants brainstorm individually 
on a shared board about given topics. This brainstorming 
task introduces the participants to speculation and prepares 
them to free their thoughts from everyday life constraints. 
The questions to ideate on are: Which co-creativity-based 
technologies will be broadly established in 10 years?, How 
will established co-creativity-based technologies influence 
social norms and value systems (e.g. authorship, authentic-
ity, autonomy, quality) in 10 years? and, What are the main 
challenges to be overcome to establish co-creative systems 
within the next 10 years? The resulting collection of 
thoughts serves as an idea pool from which working groups 
can subsequently choose a co-creativity-related topic of in-
terest for the speculation of a future scenario. The specula-
tion and conception of this scenario is carried out in three 
steps. First, the topic of interest is analyzed with regards to 
the societal or human factor and the influencing factor. 
While the first refers to the relation of the chosen topic to 
societal systems or the role of human individuals in relation 
to the chosen topic, the latter questions the factors that ena-
ble or hinder the development of the chosen topic or issue 
with regards to co-creative systems. Second, from a perspec-
tive of a future in ten years, it is speculated how the topic of 
interest and/or the corresponding factors have evolved over 
the past years. In particular, a product or a service that has a 
major influence on the co-creative future scenario or results 
from the scenario is to be conceived. Third, effects of the 
conceived scenario and product on the future environment 
are to be speculated about. Finally, in the third phase, the 
group visualizes the conceived product or service as a prod-
uct webpage optionally using a provided webpage-template. 
The webpage includes information about the future sce-
nario, about the product or service and about how it can af-
fect the life of their users. 
Discussion and Conclusion 
The presented framework provides a guideline for speculat-
ing about the future of co-creative systems. It was conceived 
to aid collaboration between inter-disciplinary speculators 
when imagining future scenarios together. Furthermore, the 
framework aims at supporting the generation of visual spec-
ulative products. These products can serve as a starting point 
for a broad external audience to discuss about developments 
and impacts of co-creative technology on possible futures in 
a pluralistic manner. 
 The questions addressed within the framework stem from 
the societal and philosophical questions posed in the com-
putational creativity literature. Regarding the list of themes 
selected, no claim to completeness is made and the section 
on the societal and philosophical questions above is limited 
to raise all issues. Nevertheless, we hope the collection of 
themes and our framework provide a starting point for con-
versations on where the future of co-creative systems may 
lie and what to keep an eye on when heading there. 
References 
Ackerman, M., Goel, A., Johnson, C. G., Jordanous, A., 
Leon, C., Perez y Perez, R., Toivonen, H., and Ventura, D. 
2017. Teaching Computational Creativity. Proc. of the 8th 
ICCC: 9-16. 
Cohen, H. 1988. How to Draw Three People in a Botanical 
Garden. AAAI Vol. 89: 846-855. 
Cohen, P. 2016. Harold Cohen and AARON. AI Magazine, 
37(4): 63-66. 
Colton, S., and Wiggins, G. A. 2012. Computational crea-
tivity: The final frontier?. Ecai Vol. 12: 21-26. 
Cunha, J. M., Rebelo, S., Martins, P., and Machado, P. 2019. 
Assessing Usefulness of a Visual Blending System:" Pic-
tionary Has Used Image-making New Meaning Logic for 
Decades. We Don't Need a Computational Platform to Ex-
plore the Blending Phenomena", Do We?. Proc. of the 10th 
ICCC: 296-300. 
Davis, N., Hsiao, C. P., Popova, Y., and Magerko, B. 2015. 
An enactive model of creativity for computational collabo-
ration and co-creation. In Creativity in the Digital Age. Lon-
don: Springer. 109-133. 
Dunne, A. and Raby, F. 2013. Speculative everything: de-
sign, fiction, and social dreaming. Cambridge: MIT Press. 
Jennings, K. E. (2010). Developing creativity: Artificial bar-
riers in artificial intelligence. Minds and Machines, 20(4): 
489-501. 
Karimi, P., Maher, M. L., Davis, N., and Grace, K. 2019. 
Deep Learning in a Computational Model for Conceptual 
Shifts in a Co-Creative Design System. Proc. of the 10th 
ICCC: 17-24. 
Kantosalo, A., Toivanen, J. M., Xiao, P., and Toivonen, H. 
2014. From Isolation to Involvement: Adapting Machine 
Creativity Software to Support Human-Computer Co-Crea-
tion. Proc. of the 5th ICCC: 1-7. 
Liapis, A., Yannakakis, G. N., Alexopoulos, C., and Lopes, 
P. 2016. Can computers foster human users' creativity? The-
ory and praxis of mixed-initiative co-creativity. Digital Cul-
ture & Education, 8(2): 136-153. 
Maher, M. L. 2012. Computational and collective creativity: 
Who’s being creative?. Proc. of the 3rd ICCC: 67-71. 
Malpass, M. 2017. Critical design in context: History, the-
ory, and practices. London, UK: Bloomsbury Publishing. 
Moffat, D. C., and Kelly, M. 2006. An investigation into 
people’s bias against computational creativity in music 
composition. Assessment, 13(11). 
Novick, D., and Sutton, S. 1997. What is mixed-initiative 
interaction? AAAI Technical Report SS-97-04: 114-116. 
Pettee, M., Shimmin, C., Duhaime, D., and Vidrin, I. 2019. 
Beyond Imitation: Generative and Variational Choreogra-
phy via Machine Learning. Proc. of the 10th ICCC: 196-
203. 
