Generative AI Futures: A Speculative Design Exploration
Lauren Lin
Northwestern university
laurenlin2025@u.northwestern.edu
Duri Long
Northwestern university
duri@northwestern.edu
ABSTRACT
What generative AI futures do we want—and what futures do we
not want? To imagine what might exist in the future, we apply
speculative design to explore plausible scenarios for generative
AI and human coexistence. In this paper, we present gAIrden and
Onion AI: two in-progress speculative concepts of future generative
AI tools, their use cases, and the systems in which they exist. We
analyze the designs through lenses of Environment, Data Privacy,
Embodiment, and Play. This trip into the future is driven by the
research question: how might generative AI tools change how we
produce creativity and culture? When we return to the present, we
ask ourselves, how might generative AI support positive outcomes
for individuals and communities? Can we predict (and potentially
mitigate) negative consequences of generative AI tools? The specu-
lative designs purposefully engage viewers in futures thinking to
reclaim conversation around the future of technology.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Human-centered computing → Interaction design; Interaction
design process and methods; • Computing methodologies → Ar-
tificial intelligence; • Applied computing → Arts and humanities.
KEYWORDS
Speculative Design, Generative AI, Creativity, Embodiment, Futures
Studies
ACM Reference Format:
Lauren Lin and Duri Long. 2023. Generative AI Futures: A Speculative
Design Exploration. In Creativity and Cognition (C&C ’23), June 19–21, 2023,
Virtual Event, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 4 pages. https://doi.org/10.
1145/3591196.3596616
1
INTRODUCTION
Generative artificial intelligence (AI) tools have quickly become
part of our lives—popular apps like ChatGPT, Dall-E, and Midjour-
ney garner both excitement and fear, and most of all, uncertainty.
Conceptions of what constitutes creative practice are changing.
To imagine what might exist in the future, we use speculative
design to stir discussion, probing us to consider what futures we
want—and what futures we don’t want. In this paper, we present
two in-progress speculative visuals of future generative AI tools. We
analyze the designs through lenses of Environment, Data Privacy,
Embodiment, and Play.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
C&C ’23, June 19–21, 2023, Virtual Event, USA
© 2023 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0180-1/23/06.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3591196.3596616
This exploration is driven by several research questions: How
might generative AI tools change how we produce creativity and
culture? How might generative AI support positive outcomes for
individuals and communities? Can we predict (and potentially mit-
igate) negative consequences of generative AI tools?
2
RELATED WORK
The majority of recent research on creating with generative AI
tools investigates prompt engineering [7], human-AI interfaces [3],
and design principles [8]—which address immediate challenges
in designing for AI-mediated experiences. We expand upon the
existing generative AI research by applying speculative design,
resulting in new considerations about future socio-environmental
implications for creative AI.
3
METHODS
Speculative design is our method of inquiry, usually taking the
“form of scenarios, often starting with a what-if question, and are
intended to open up spaces of debate and discussion; therefore, they
are by necessity provocative, intentionally simplified, and fictional”
[2].
While there is no “correct” way to practice speculative design,
there are common frameworks. For example, the futures cone il-
lustrates the plurality of possible futures, ranging from probable,
plausible, possible, and preferable [2].
Parallel Presents is another method to imagine “fictional parallel
worlds” that stem from “contemporary realities” like social issues
or cultural movements [5]. We extrapolated current conditions
of the world to extremes (for example, climate change results in
scarce energy resources, impacting the computing power available
globally).
We involved generative AI tools such as Dall-E, Midjourney, and
Stable Diffusion to create speculative designs and visualize artifacts
that have yet to exist, bringing new, realistic manifestations of ideas
to life.
4
DESIGN THEMES
The concepts are explored through four themes, which we chose
by reflecting on opportunity areas for user empowerment (Em-
bodiment, Play) and pre-existing concerns regarding technology
(Environment, Data Privacy).
4.1
Environment
Kate Crawford’s Atlas of AI cites that “running only a single NLP
model produced more than 660,000 pounds of carbon dioxide emis-
sions, the equivalent of five gas-powered cars over their total life-
time (including their manufacturing) or 125 round-trip flights from
New York to Beijing” [1]. Conversations about generative AI are
climate conversations.
380
C&C ’23, June 19–21, 2023, Virtual Event, USA
Lauren Lin and Duri Long
4.2
Data Privacy
Data Privacy is already a contested topic, as AI tools require enor-
mous amounts of data, either input directly or indirectly through
extracted data. Uploading personal information to AI raises ques-
tions about data exploitation, even post-interaction. This lens asks
how AI futures protect or compromise personal data.
4.3
Embodiment
Generative AI currently relies on text-based interaction, but the
future isn’t limited to prompt engineering, and human creativity
is situated in physical, social spaces. Through the Embodiment
lens, we evaluate if, and how, our concepts support multimodal
interaction paradigms to “situate the physically-embodied digital
information in physical space” [6].
4.4
Play (Designing for ludic engagement)
Looking through the lens of Play lets us design to “promote cu-
riosity, exploration and reflection” [4], which can broaden more
diverse participation and interest in building technology. Counter
to today’s fixation on productivity tools, we wonder how genera-
tive AI might center joy, delight and leisure in support of desirable
futures.
5
CONCEPTS IN PROGRESS
5.1
gAIrden
gAIrden (Figure 1) draws on the Parallel Presents method and is
situated within the Plausible futures cone. The nature analogy shifts
our temporal perceptions of computational speed and encourages
sustainable resource management. gAIrdeners “plant” inputs (text-
based or art requests)—but the AI-generation is not instant.
5.1.1
Environment. gAIrden creates “fast versus slow” AI, drawing
from the fast fashion movement. gAIrdeners might monitor local
climate patterns, identifying optimal conditions where human de-
mands align with resource availability. While popups and badges
increase eco-consciousness, the receipt’s pay-to-play system will
likely exacerbate inequities.
5.1.2
Data Privacy. The gAIrden’s plants are directly owned in the
way one might have a garden in their backyard or co-own a family
farm. gAIrdeners hold full ownership of inputs (seeds) and outputs
(plants). Local cities would receive individual’s AI-energy usage
data.
5.1.3
Embodiment. gAIrdens are composed of tangible robotic
plants, with pots as computers running the AI model locally. gAIrd-
ens become mini data centers. The plant physically grows to demon-
strate progress and mechanically shrinks once rendering is finished.
This tech “garden” may encourage people to connect to the materi-
ality of AI, disrupting our notions of “invisible” computing.
5.1.4
Play. Gardening is often about nurturing progress, focusing
the human-AI collaboration on process over product. The anticipa-
tion period creates a delightful (or surprising) reveal, reminiscent
of a tree’s first fruit after months of care. Generated pieces are
minted with a badge indicating the sustainability of the production
(similar to LEED certifications) and could lead to a gamified system
promoting “slow AI.”
5.2
Onion AI
Onion AI (Figure 2) is inspired by participatory design and art-
making. A long-time resident tells the story of moving to this city,
which becomes the prompt for an AI-generated layer. Two friends
select the mural’s sky and jump in excitement, resulting in an ener-
getic apricot-pink horizon. Over time, the murals evolve as people
interact with it—and become time capsules for the community.
5.2.1
Environment. The replacement of concrete walls and side-
walks with digital interfaces introduces more artificial technology
into the environment. Large scale, constantly active generative AI
is environmentally expensive. This leads us to question the neces-
sity of technology in supporting art and creativity, especially when
sustainability is compromised. Why not have real paint?
5.2.2
Data Privacy. While all contributors collectively own the
resulting art piece, ownership of the input data (personal stories,
voices, body mapping) is ambiguous. City-owned inputs may give
rise to citizen surveillance. Art-making can be incredibly personal—
and Onion AI makes it public. Even with playful technologies, we
must be cautious about the data supply chain.
5.2.3
Embodiment. The voice and drawing inputs create inclusive
touchpoints for co-creation that aren’t reliant on prompt engineer-
ing proficiency. People express their lived experiences through
“human” methods of communication (eg. storytelling or body lan-
guage).
5.2.4
Play. Collaborative art-making involves taking turns, build-
ing on ideas, and elements of the game Telephone. People simul-
taneously work on a portion of the piece, with the art evolving
through diverse inspiration and interpretation. Onion AI broadens
participation—from kids, graffiti artists, locals—to co-create in a fun,
low stakes way. Here, generative AI promotes delight to reclaim
community-centered public spaces.
6
FUTURE WORK AND IMPLICATIONS
Our next steps include refining visuals, worldbuilding, and craft-
ing origin stories to flesh out our speculative designs, exploring
new systems of human-AI coexistence. We plan to experiment
with ChatGPT for narrative generation and gather feedback on the
emotional resonance of our speculations. Speculative designs can
become an entry point to engage the public in futures thinking and
imagine alternatives for the environment, policy, urban design and
technology.
Based on our experience engaging in speculative design, one
future research question of interest is: how might we empower
the public to evaluate the impacts of AI and diversify participation
when designing AI futures? We imagine a generative AI design
toolkit and workshop that applies speculative design frameworks to
codesign AI, restoring ownership to users to determine the future
of technology.
REFERENCES
[1] Crawford, K. 2021. The Atlas of AI: Power, Politics, and the Planetary Costs of
Artificial Intelligence. Yale University Press.
381
Generative AI Futures: A Speculative Design Exploration
C&C ’23, June 19–21, 2023, Virtual Event, USA
Figure 1: gAIrden speculative design concept. Visuals by Lauren Lin and images created with the assistance of DALL·E 2.
382
C&C ’23, June 19–21, 2023, Virtual Event, USA
Lauren Lin and Duri Long
Figure 2: Onion AI speculative design concept. Visuals by Lauren Lin and images created with the assistance of DALL·E 2.
[2] Dunne, A. and Raby, F. 2013. Speculative everything: design, fiction, and social
dreaming. The MIT Press.
[3] Evin, I., Hämäläinen, P. and Guckelsberger, C. 2022. Cine-AI: Generating Video
Game Cutscenes in the Style of Human Directors. Proceedings of the ACM on
Human-Computer Interaction. 6, CHI PLAY (Oct. 2022), 1–23. DOI:https://doi.org/
10.1145/3549486.
[4] Gaver, W.W., Bowers, J., Boucher, A., Gellerson, H., Pennington, S., Schmidt, A.,
Steed, A., Villars, N. and Walker, B. 2004. The drift table: designing for ludic
engagement. CHI ’04 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(New York, NY, USA, Apr. 2004), 885–900.
[5] Howell, N., F. Schulte, B., Twigger Holroyd, A., Fatás Arana, R., Sharma, S. and
Eden, G. 2021. Calling for a Plurality of Perspectives on Design Futuring: An
Un-Manifesto. Extended Abstracts of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (Yokohama Japan, May 2021), 1–10.
[6] Ishii, H. 2008. Tangible bits: beyond pixels. Proceedings of the 2nd international
conference on Tangible and embedded interaction (New York, NY, USA, Feb. 2008),
xv–xxv.
[7] Oppenlaender, J., Linder, R. and Silvennoinen, J. 2023. Prompting AI Art: An
Investigation into the Creative Skill of Prompt Engineering. arXiv.
[8] Weisz, J.D., Muller, M., He, J. and Houde, S. 2023. Toward General Design Principles
for Generative AI Applications. arXiv.
383
