Humans Will Lose Proper Imagination Unconsciously 
Yuxuan Huang 
School of Creative Media 
City University of Hong Kong 
Kowloon Tong, Hong Kong 
yhuang573-c@my.cityu.edu.hk 
Hugh Xuechen LIU 
School of Creative Media  
 City University of Hong Kong 
Kowloon Tong, Hong Kong 
Hugh.liu@my.cityu.edu.hk 
Abstract 
With the maturity of sophisticated generative models, 
humans can generate high-quality content according to their 
requirements within seconds. Research has shown that 
human-computer co-creativity can be more imaginative. 
There is no doubt that this machine-in-the-loop creative 
process would become the primary choice for novices and 
professionals when developing creative artifacts. However, 
will humans become addicted to this creative mode and lose 
the ability of sole creation, and eventually get limited by 
machines’ imagination? Furthermore, how can humans 
realize that these generative models are limiting their 
imagination instead of giving inspiration when using them 
to facilitate their work? In this paper, we argue that the 
imagination ability of computers obeys normal distribution 
when seeded with different input prompts and there are 
merely outliers. We take creative writing as a study case and 
design a series of speculative workshops. We then analyze 
the quality of text generated by the latest and most powerful 
large-language model during the workshops and carry out 
semi-structured interviews with professional reviewers. The 
results show that machines’ imagination capacity may be the 
boundary that humans can hardly breakthrough in the future. 
Instead, humans are likely to get trapped in the iterative 
creation of the existing data (i.e., the newly generated and 
published content this time becomes part of the existing 
datasets for generating new content next time), and humans’ 
imagination might be substituted by machines’ imagination 
in the end. Therefore, we call for research for humans to 
break through the limitation of machines' imagination. Such 
breaking can be purely done by humans or with the support 
of other computational creativity tools.   
 
Keywords 
Generative AI, Imagination, Speculative Design 
 
