Message Ritual: A Posthuman Account of Living with Lamp
Nina Rajcic
SensiLab, Monash University
Caulfield East, Victoria, Australia
Nina.Rajcic@monash.edu
Jon McCormack
SensiLab, Monash University
Caulfield East, Victoria, Australia
Jon.McCormack@monash.edu
Figure 1: The Message Ritual lamp.
ABSTRACT
As we become increasingly entangled with digital technologies,
the boundary between human and machine is progressively blur-
ring. Adopting a performative, posthumanist perspective resolves
this ambiguity by proposing that such boundaries are not prede-
termined, rather they are enacted within a certain material con-
figuration. Using this approach, dubbed ‘Entanglement HCI’, this
paper presents Message Ritual – a novel, integrated AI system that
encourages the re-framing of memory through machine generated
poetics. Embodied within a domestic table lamp, the system listens
in on conversations occurring within the home, drawing out key
topics and phrases of the day and reconstituting them through
machine generated poetry, delivered to household members via
SMS upon waking each morning. Participants across four house-
holds were asked to live with the lamp over a two week period. We
present a diffractive analysis exploring how the lamp becomes with
participants and discuss the implications of this method for future
HCI research.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany
© 2023 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9421-5/23/04...$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3544548.3581363
CCS CONCEPTS
• Human-centered computing → Empirical studies in collabora-
tive and social computing; Field studies; Collaborative and social com-
puting devices; Ambient intelligence; • Applied computing →
Media arts; • Computing methodologies → Natural language
processing.
KEYWORDS
Augmented memory, posthumanism, narrative, poetry, generative
networks, diffractive analysis
ACM Reference Format:
Nina Rajcic and Jon McCormack. 2023. Message Ritual: A Posthuman Ac-
count of Living with Lamp. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’23), April 23–28, 2023, Ham-
burg, Germany. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 16 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3544548.3581363
1
INTRODUCTION
Rituals serve as a background against which our present
times may be seen to stand out more clearly.
— Byung-Chul Han [33, p. vi]
As we move into a new age of Artificial Intelligence (AI) in-
creasingly dominated by ‘foundation models’ [11], technology is
broadening its role from that of being a tool or providing a ser-
vice, to one of being an interlocutor, companion or co-creator. For
many of us, our increasingly deep and nuanced entanglements with
arXiv:2301.10947v1  [cs.HC]  26 Jan 2023
CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany
Rajcic and McCormack
technology mark the beginning of a new era of human-machine
relationships1 [6, 7]. This paper offers a practical, affirmative vision
of one possibility for what our encounters with technology could
become. We come from a design perspective, motivated by recent
movements in HCI and posthumanism [25, 75]. Recognising that
technology is not benign, and that by incorporating emerging AI
models it carries increasingly powerful agency [42, 63, 70], we shift
from the rubric of human-centred design to that of human and
non-human entanglements, with an emphasis on agential relations
and the transformative nature of things [75, p95]. Our research is
motivated by an exploration of the possibilities for new, open-ended
relationships we might want to have with AI technology, rather
than designing to solve a specific problem or engineer a particular
outcome.
We present the design of a new kind of domestic technological
artefact: Message Ritual, an ambient AI system embodied in the
form of a table lamp. The lamp listens in to household conversations,
and from them derives important topics and themes. These themes
are used as the basis for a unique machine-generated narrative
that is delivered daily via SMS to each household member. Message
Ritual is an experimental and bespoke artwork that forms part of a
broader thesis exploring the role of ritual in AI technologies. Four
different households were recruited to live with the lamp for an
extended period. We present a diffractive analysis on the system
and its entanglements with both participants and researchers. This
analysis revealed that amongst the participants there was no singu-
lar conclusion or way to understand the lamp, but rather multiple,
sometimes contradictory insights arising from their entanglements
with the system. We use this approach to demonstrate how the
adoption of posthumanist thinking is valuable when designing
novel technological artefacts, and as a methodological framework
for exploring a design’s entanglements with both the human and
non-human.
2
BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
2.1
Human Machine Relationships
In the seminal 1960 paper Man-Computer Symbiosis [44], Licklider
envisions a world in which humans and computers are intimately
coupled, forming a symbiotic relationship from which emerges
a new kind of computer, and a new kind of human. Licklider’s
formative musings, among others, became the foundation of the
field of Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) as we know it today.
With the advent of the Personal Computer (PC), there was a shift
from simple task-based processing towards real-time interfaces
between human and machine.
Computers first became commonplace in the office environ-
ment, and so early HCI research concerned itself with achieving
goals of functionality, productivity and efficiency. Consequently,
the methodologies adopted during this time were those aligned with
task-based, goal-oriented evaluation, largely stemming from classi-
cal cognitivism [36]. As computing permeated from the workplace
into the home, then from the home onto the body, HCI research
began to explore more nuanced, subjective and distinctly human
needs such as emotion, creativity, and loneliness [9, 10]. The epis-
temological processes within HCI research likewise shifted from
1or perhaps more cynically, dependencies.
engineering-inspired positivism towards socially constructed and
situated forms of knowledge production.
Today, the intimate couplings between people and their personal
devices are widely evident. We are, at all times, surrounded by
a network of interconnected devices that monitor, mediate, and
mould our parallel and hyperconnected realities. We have become
entangled with technology in such a way that it’s difficult to draw
the boundary between human and machine. AI, brain-computer
interfaces, and bio-implants are just a few of the technologies cur-
rently gaining prominence that challenge our existing conceptions
of agency, autonomy, and the interface. Simultaneously, HCI re-
search is on the cusp of it’s fourth wave as the traditional notions of
the ‘user’ and the ‘interface’ are breaking down [3]. Frauenberger
proposes that in order to settle its “epistemological troubles, the on-
tological uncertainties and the ethical conundrums,” HCI research
must now turn to posthumanist, or entanglement theories [27].
Posthumanist philosophies, in the broadest sense, call for a radi-
cal de-centering of the human, marked by a return to materiality
[12]. With early roots in Donna Haraway’s conceptualisation of the
cyborg [35], posthumanist thinking puts into question the founda-
tions laid by the secular humanist movement—that humans embody
the locus of agency, morality, rationality, and individuality. With
the accelerating growth of technology and its increasing integra-
tion into daily life, the very definition of ‘human’ becomes strained,
the separation between ‘human’ and ‘non-human’ begins to break
down, and a dualist understanding of the world (e.g. nature/culture,
subject/object, mind/body) no longer serves the reality before us.
Instead, relational ontologies are adopted as the new paradigm,
proposing that the relations between things are more fundamental
ontologically than the things themselves [67].
2.2
Posthumanism and HCI
The central tenets of posthumanism, when applied to HCI research
and design practices, put into question a number of the concep-
tual foundations currently in place. Firstly, the notion of the ‘user’,
who is often perceived as homogeneous, or at best falling within
a handful of simplistic categories based around perceived skills,
gender, age, etc. This conceptualisation not only reduces the hu-
man to a prescribed stereotype, but suggests that only the human
possesses and exerts agency over the machine. Secondly, one must
ask where exactly lies the ‘interface’, when moving away from
traditional screen-based technologies, and towards embedded and
embodied computing. Adopting relational ontologies leads us to the
understanding that in the designing of ‘interfaces’, we are, in fact,
designing the relationships between human and machine through
which humanity continues to be shaped [62].
Barad’s account of performativity as a metaphysics [1] offers
further insight into how we might approach this notion of human-
machine relationships. The boundaries between human and ma-
chine are not predetermined, instead they are enacted. To draw these
lines too early in the design process is to neglect the dynamic nature
in which a human and machine will negotiate their respective roles,
responsibilities, and agencies. Rather than designing interactions
with fixed roles set up to be assumed by ‘user’ and the machine, we
can instead design for the relationship as a whole. This involves
taking into account the user during their active engagement with an
Message Ritual: A Posthuman Account of Living with Lamp
CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany
artefact along with the greater context of the situated relationship,
and moreover how it develops over time. For example, the effect
on participants when they’re ‘not using’ the artefact, as well as the
effect on the relationships between human participants, participant
and designer, and those of participants within their wider networks.
These entanglements should be recognised during the entirety of
the design and evaluation processes.
Agential cuts must necessarily be enacted at one scope or another—
the methodology does not feign to account for the ‘whole’, but
rather to take accountability of these cuts by explicitly acknowl-
edging when and where they are made, and ultimately to take a
multiplicity of configurations into consideration when trying to
better understand the effect of bringing a novel artefact into the
world. To bring into contrast this multiplicity of states is what Barad
would call diffraction as a methodology. Once again utilising the
metaphor of the photon, Barad proposes that diffraction leads to
a “mapping of the effects of differences”, as opposed to reflection
in which “much like the infinite play of images between two fac-
ing mirrors, the epistemological gets bounced back and forth” [1].
Diffraction as a methodology is likewise proposed by Frauenberger
[27] as a valuable tool in HCI research—rather than asking what
makes an artefact ‘work’, we should instead ask how an artefact
becomes ‘different things’.
2.3
Habit and Ritual
Perhaps one of the most prominent contemporary relationships we
observe today is that between a person and their smartphone. Al-
though the ambitions of artificial general intelligence (AGI) research
still sit firmly at the horizon, we have already formed relationships
with AI systems that have a profound impact on everyday life. Social
media platforms have adopted AI for numerous applications, but
most notable are the AI systems that curate, in real-time, the stream
of content that each user is exposed to, known to us simply as ‘the
Feed’. The goal of these algorithms is to increase engagement, and
ultimately to maximise screen-time. The result is an invisible yet
highly targeted system that affects behaviour change—working
most effectively when the user is unaware.
Yet the presence of agency within these algorithms is unmistak-
able. Social networks provide the ideal example of an assemblage of
human and non-human agents, illustrating the posthuman reality
of today. The algorithms are distinctly inhuman; they are indifferent
to the humanist values of sovereignty, freedom, self-determination,
and liberty. They are indifferent to whether or not the end-user
is human at all. Social media feeds favour immediacy, transfigur-
ing time in such a way that the past is to be forgotten, and the
future cyclic and predictable. Similarly, spacial locality is reconfig-
ured, with information ‘depart[ing] from anywhere, and arriv[ing]
everywhere’ [20].
The disruptive nature of these non-human agents on human
perceptions and behaviours can be observed across many aspects
of society. In the case of social media, the favoured behaviour of the
algorithms, and hence the generated behaviour in users, is one of
unreflective, reactionary engagement. Users are rewarded for their
unceasing engagement through clicks, likes, comments, shares—in
addition to the infinite scroll of hyperpersonalised content. The
relationships engendered by social media networks are then, by
design, habitual and largely unconscious. Habits are, in the broadest
definition, automatic and repetitive behaviours that are learned
and enforced through action [48]. Habits can be both positive and
negative, yet in any case markedly require little conscious thought
or intention, often becoming ‘second nature’. Rituals similarly in-
volve routines, but can be differentiated by their intentionality, deep
emotional involvement, and their ‘socially shared meaning’ [32].
Notably, rituals serve a societal function, in that they communicate
and reinforce the shared values and identity within a culture [59].
The idea of incorporating rituals into technological design is not
new (see, e.g. [15, 23, 31, 40, 41, 45, 66]). In some cases the aim has
been to re-establish traditional or existing rituals in a new tech-
nological form, in others new rituals are developed in response to
problems proselytised by technology. Klüber and colleagues [41] de-
signed a tangible artifact for relationship transition rituals, demon-
strating that tangible devices can shape new ritual experiences
and provide new ways of dealing with relationship uncertainty.
Browne and Swift [14] employ techniques of defamiliarisation and
performance art to recontextualise and critique neural networks
and AI more generally via a form of Ouija board. Work by Chatting
and colleagues [15] developed a bespoke set of devices that permit-
ted parents separated from their son to create a ritual of location
sharing and reflective communication. A “telescope” device and
accompanying “totem” allowed the child’s parents to communicate
their current remote location, which the child could find via the
telescope. Sas and colleagues [66] explored the rituals of “letting go”
(of people or material objects) used by psychologists and applied
them to the letting go of digital artefacts, through a framework that
highlighted temporality, visibility, and force.
While modern human societies often seek to re-establish past
rituals that have been displaced or subsumed by technological de-
velopment, the philosopher Byung-Chul Han offers an alternate
view on the role and value of rituals in contemporary technolog-
ical cultures. He sees them as symbolic acts, constituted through
symbolic perception, that bring forth ‘community without commu-
nication’ [33]. Seeing the world as data rich, but symbol poor, Han
argues that the value of rituals is in their ability to be ‘symbolic
techniques of making oneself at home in the world’. That is, rituals
are to time what the home is to space: they render time habitable
[33, p.7]. In a world obsessed with relentless consumption, we are
surrounded by disappearance—a destabilising force on life. Rituals
offer an alternative to this, by lingering they can endure, making
time accessible, structuring time and furnishing it, like a home.
2.4
Related HCI Design Work
Several elements of the work presented here have been previously
explored in design and HCI research in different contexts. Strong
and Gaver first proposed the idea of simple domestic objects with
embedded technology to evoke non-verbal remote communication
and intimacy [69]. Nowacka and colleagues [50] developed an in-
teractive lamp for the home that responded to movement gestures
as a means of communication. Kirk and colleagues [40] focus of the
use of phatic communication, using what they term “phatic devices”
to support new forms of communication for mobile and remote
workers using a research through design approach [29, 30]. These
CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany
Rajcic and McCormack
projects use technology to replace a lost intimacy or communica-
tion brought about by physical separation. In contrast, our work
seeks to reframe individual memory through AI generated poetic
interpretations of personal conversations. Rather than replacing
something lost through technology, Message Ritual asks something
of those that it is embedded with via the ritual of human communi-
cation, and in return it offers machine interpreted reflections back
to those who have participated in this ritual.
Other work in HCI research has experimented with ritualising
our interactions with digital assistants. Benabdallah’s Sybil pre-
sented a glowing orb with attached breathing sensor, the orb ask-
ing participants to synchronise their breathing with it’s pulsating
light [5]. The system then speaks a short, machine-generated “pro-
hecy” based on the quality of the breathing patterns. The “Voices
and Voids” project subverted a traditional voice assistant system
through art experiments to reveal their hidden characteristics and
inner workings [21]. The researchers looked at transcripts from
voice assistants and derived a series of performative vignettes based
on issues of misinterpretation, mistakes, raising issues of ethics
and privacy. In a design-led inquiry, Parviainen and Søndergaard
experimented with whispering as a way of interacting with per-
sonal voice assistants [54] examining how this mode of interaction
might facilitate the experiential qualities of creepiness, trust, and
intimacy. Our project uses a similar design-led enquiry, however in
contrast to these projects Message Ritual is not positioned as a voice
assistant – it doesn’t speak, nor does it acknowledge or respond di-
rectly to spoken conversation. Additionally, any interactivity with
the system is deliberately deferred: unlike these previous projects
there is no immediate response or reward, one must wait until the
next day before the receiving a text message from the lamp.
Related to the design approach used here are “mediating” ap-
proaches, such as postphenomenology, which views technology as
a transformative mediator of human experiences and practices
rather than an inert functional object [37, 38, 72, 73]. Verbeek [73]
suggests that designers “do not merely design products, but hu-
man practices and experiences” and therefore, “Designing things
is designing human existence”. Thus, humans and technology co-
constitute human subjectivity and our objective experience of the
world [37, 61]. Projects such as “Tilting bowl” (a bowl that ran-
domly tilts, given to a small group of philosophers) [78], “Morse
Things” (networked ceramic bowls that communicate via Morse
code, deployed to the households of six interaction designers) [77]
typify this postphenomenological approach to HCI design.
In a recent book, Ron Wakkary outlines the role of posthumanist
thinking for design, including design in HCI [75]. He argues that
the main arc of design over the last forty years has been to prioritise
human values, conceptualised anthropocentricly through a series
of paradigms such as human factors, ergonomics, embodied interac-
tion and human-centred design. While such paradigms have served
us well, they have arguably come at a huge environmental, social
and cultural cost. Posthumanist thinking offers a potential way out
of this crisis, requiring greater humility in design, shifting the focus
away from ‘the power of self-reflexive human reasoning to situated,
partial, and multiple ways of knowing.’ [75, p.2]. Posthuman design
explores what it is like to design-with humans and non-humans,
rather than to design-for an idealised ‘user’.
Posthumanist design can take many forms, including the coun-
terfactual artefact [76] (also common in Speculative Design [24]), a
non-normative approach used to question design or technological
conventions; slow technology such as found in the work of Odom
and colleagues, whose projects such as Photobox [51, 53], Chrono-
scope [16] and Olly [52] explore time and memory using technology
to envisage longer-term relationships with personal data and mem-
ories. With a similar approach to time, Long-living chair—a rocking
chair designed by Larissa Pschetz—records and displays its use
over a period of ninety-six years, allowing the owner to observe
long-term patterns of use [55].
What distinguishes the research described here from this pre-
vious work in posthuman design is the integration of artificial
intelligence technologies into the assembly of agents within the
system. AI brings new forms of autonomy and agency into play, and
this agency has unique characteristics that differ from more simple
technologies [18], including the ability to learn, change and adapt to
people and their environment. These generative capabilities make
traditional understandings of function or behaviour inappropri-
ate, as such qualities may change over time and can not be fully
anticipated in advance by their designers.
3
MESSAGE RITUAL
In this section we present an overview of Message Ritual—an in-
tegrated system that aims to assist in the re-framing of memory
and identity through machine generated poetics. Appropriating a
standard domestic object—a table lamp—the work augments this
domestic technology with a machine listening capability and a
backend AI system. The lamp is designed to have an on-going pres-
ence in the home and functions just like any conventional lamp.
Unlike domestic “smart devices”, such as voice assistants, the lamp
is not intended as a “smart assistant”, being unresponsive to spo-
ken commands and making no acknowledgement of listening or
understanding spoken words (c.f. [60]). While other forms of in-
teraction, including voice interaction, were considered in the early
conceptualisation stage, these were rejected as likely being confus-
ing (what commands does/should it respond to?); over-emphasising
the novelty of “smart devices” at the expense of more meaningful
and ritualised entanglements with technology.
We explore an alternative approach to traditional augmented
memory systems that assist in supporting a stronger sense of self-
identity. Rather than focus on the sensing and quantification of
external experiences, we aim to construct meaningful, personal
narratives through the use of machine-generated poetics. Message
Ritual is an ambient Artificial Intelligence (AAI) system devised
to prototype these ideas. Using speech recognition the system lis-
tens in on personal conversations—drawing out key words and
phrases of significance—using them to generate poetic narratives
that are sent to the participant’s mobile phone as SMS messages
each morning.
Using the lamp’s ability to listen to human speech, Message Rit-
ual seeks to draw out significant elements of on-going domestic
conversation and use them as the basis for synthesising poetry spe-
cific to each member of the household. The process of listening and
synthesising operates over a 24 hour cycle, with poems delivered to
each member of the house via a text message when they wake each
Message Ritual: A Posthuman Account of Living with Lamp
CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany
Figure 2: Components of the Message Ritual lamp: a micro-
phone array picks up nearby conversations when the lamp
is switched on. On-board recording and speech detection is
managed by a Raspberry Pi computer embedded in the lamp.
A translucent inner tube with internal, programmable LED
lights provides the lamp’s light.
morning. The longer participants engage with the lamp, the better
it gets at identifying topics of significance in their conversations.
We now describe the technical implementation of the work.
3.1
System Architecture
The Message Ritual system consists of three main components (Fig-
ure 4): (i) a ‘lamp’ with built-in microphones and computer, (ii) an
AI speech-to-text transcription service; and (iii) a server applica-
tion (Message Ritual Server), which takes captured conversational
transcripts and uses them to create custom poetry that is then sent
to individual users as an SMS text message. We will now describe
each component in more detail.
3.1.1
Lamp. The lamp is designed with a warm, contemporary aes-
thetic to feature in a communal area of a home (Figure 1). It consists
of a translucent inner core with in-built LED illumination and an
outer glass sphere, approximately 30cm in diameter (Figure 2). We
used CAD design software and 3D printing to create this bespoke
object (Figure 3). The lamp has what appears to be a conventional
power switch that actually serves two functions: to turn the illu-
mination on and off (as would be the case with a conventional
lamp) and to start and stop the listening process. When the lamp
is illuminated it is listening for human voices, but when switched
off the listening system is deactivated. This simple functionality
gives participants an easy choice as to whether they would like
their current conversations to form part of the Message Ritual or
not.
Inside the inner core of the lamp we embedded a microphone
array based on the XMOS XVF-3000 DSP voice processor.2 This
processor is specifically designed for voice detection and transcrip-
tion duties, automatically detecting the best microphone mix based
on the direction of the detected voice and performing real-time
processing on the incoming audio, such as echo cancellation, noise
reduction and audio beam forming. The digital audio output of the
microphone array is fed into a Raspberry Pi SBC (RPi) housed at
the base of the lamp. The RPi takes the digital audio stream and
2https://www.xmos.ai/download/XVF3000-3100-product-brief(Sept-2020).pdf
Figure 3: CAD rendering of the Message Ritual lamp
processes it through a WebRTC3 Voice Activity Detector (VAD).
The VAD analyses each 30ms frame of incoming audio and looks
for those frames that contain human speech. If speech is detected,
the audio is captured and saved to a file. Listening and recording
of conversations only occurs when the lamp is switched on and
illuminated.
3.1.2
Transcription. The lamp captures these conversations through-
out a 24 hour period and stores them as audio files locally on the
Raspberry Pi, concealed in the base of the lamp. At regular inter-
vals, the transcripts are uploaded to a speech-to-text transcription
service. This service receives audio files, and, using a deep learn-
ing model, translates human speech into text. After evaluating a
number of different speech-to-text services, we used the service
offered by Assembly AI for the system described in this paper
(https://www.assemblyai.com). Our evaluations were based on cost,
ease of use (in terms of the programming API), accuracy in conversa-
tional settings and ability to deal with different English dialects and
accents (as participants in our study spoke with different accents).
While our system currently only operates with English speech,
there is no technical or conceptual reason why it could not work
with any major human language.
Once the recorded audio is converted to text by the transcription
service, the text is returned to the Raspberry Pi in the lamp as json
files that are stored locally over a 24-hour period. Once successfully
transcribed to text, the recorded audio is deleted. At each 24-hour
cycle, the Raspberry Pi uploads all the text transcripts received in
the last 24 hour period to the Message Ritual Server.
3.1.3
Message Ritual Server. Transcripts received from an individ-
ual lamp for the previous 24 hours are then processed to generate
a unique poem for each member of the household currently us-
ing the lamp. For each active lamp, the server keeps a historical
3https://webrtc.org
CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany
Rajcic and McCormack
Figure 4: Message Ritual schematic diagram. Conversations recorded by the lamp are sent to a cloud-based AI transcription
service that returns text transcripts of the conversations. These transcripts are then sent to the Message Ritual server, which
analyses them to generate short poems based on the topics of conversation. Every morning a new poem is sent to each partic-
ipant’s smartphone as a text message.
record of all conversations (the historical transcript) and uses this
as a basis to extract the key elements and topics of each conversa-
tion. After filtering stop words, we used term frequency–inverse
document frequency (TF-IDF, [65]) analysis to select potential can-
didates as key words of each conversation. TF-IDF analysis returns
a weighted frequency that signifies the frequency of a given word
in the previous day’s conversation, as compared to it’s frequency
in the historical transcript. Thus, the longer people use the lamp
to track their conversations, the better it becomes at evaluating
potentially important topics of conversation. TF-IDF does this by
recognising words that are frequently used in a new conversation
but historically infrequent across all conversations.
3.1.4
Poetry Generation. The top 20 words are then determined
according to their weighted frequencies, along with their part-of-
speech (POS) tags, with these randomly selected for each participant
to form a seed phrase for the poetry generation. Seed phrases are
short concept “seeds” used by the AI poetry generation system to
synthesise a unique poem. The general structure of the seed phrase
is “Adjective Noun, Noun”. Our poetry generation system is based
on the GPT-2-345M transformer network developed and released by
OpenAI [56]. The Transformer architecture was first introduced in
[71], and has since become a popular method to produce state of the
art results in Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks [22, 56]. We
fine-tuned the network parameters of the 345M model by retraining
it on a custom corpus of selected texts. The choice of training ma-
terial directly reflects our overall design intentions: to encourage
the reframing of personal memories through poetry. Texts were
selected from a large range of styles and formats, including con-
temporary poetry, horoscopes, and philosophical aphorisms and
writings. Texts were loosely chosen to satisfy one of two require-
ments. Firstly, we intend for the generated text to address the user
directly by using the second-person pronouns ‘you’ and ‘your’. This
technique invites the user to make sense of the text through reflec-
tion on themselves and their experiences. Users will naturally place
themselves as the subject of the lamp’s poetry, and through contin-
ued use should develop a relationship with the system. Secondly,
the content of the texts selected should be of a personal nature,
emotionally charged or contain strong imagery.
The final corpus is composed of 2,605 individual short-form
texts, reaching just over 1MB in size. At this size, overfitting our
model becomes a concern. We do not want the lamp to simply
replicate full poems from our corpus, but to produce original output
that blends the various writing styles. The text generation process
takes as input a number of parameters: length is set to 120 (upper
limit on word length of output); temperature set to 0.9 (higher
temperature results in more random completions), and top_k set to
80 (80 words are considered at each step of generation). The seed
phrase is used to initiate the generation of a poem. The output text
is trimmed to prevent run-off sentences, and furthermore discarded
(and regenerated) if the length does not fall between 50 and 450
characters. We found this range of lengths is most suitable for the
SMS format. Separate poems are generated for each member of the
household in which the lamp is located and sent by SMS in the
early morning.
Message Ritual: A Posthuman Account of Living with Lamp
CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany
Figure 5: The Message Ritual lamp in a domestic setting. The lamp blends into the space, its light carving a space for people
to gather and converse.
3.2
Design Factors
This work draws on the development of Mirror Ritual [57]; a real-
time affective interface in which machine-generated poetry is dy-
namically presented as a response to perceived emotion of the
viewer. Message Ritual similarly utilises machine-generated poetry
to foster reflection and introspection as the individual attempts to
draw meaning from their delivered poem. Instead of grounding
itself in the viewer’s in-the-moment mood, Message Ritual draws
upon an individual’s recent memories to contextualise their po-
etry. The system is not attempting to improve the recollection of
‘accurate’ memories, rather it encourages the active framing and
re-framing of personal events that contribute to one’s overall life
narrative. The work is designed to be lived with over an extended
period of time, with the poetry referencing the events of the pre-
vious day. This self-referential nature of the experience aims to
provide some sense of continuity over the interactions, allowing
people to develop a meaningful relationship with the system over
time.
The design of the lamp itself is crucial to the overall experience,
as it will be embedded into the homes and lives of it’s users. Similar
to Mirror Ritual [57, 58], the lamp serves both a functional and aes-
thetic role in participants’ homes. Everyday domestic objects (e.g.
furniture, crockery, plants, soft furnishings) are of interest here as
they have clear and well-defined roles in one’s life, but they also dis-
tinctly lack a technological component. In wider HCI research, we
have seen the widespread integration of technology and everyday
objects (the ‘smartification’ of the home) [4, 64], generally aiming
to augment both the function of the artefact itself, and to increase
the connectedness of objects with each other (i.e. internet of things).
In this project, an everyday object is chosen not to necessarily ‘im-
prove’ or augment that object’s function, but rather to bypass any
preconceived notions or behaviours that users may associate with
traditional interfaces such as screens and smartphones. In this way,
the natural behaviours afforded by non-technological objects (i.e.
switching a lamp on or off) are utilized in the interaction, allowing
for the interface to escape common behavioural and gestural habits
such as tapping, swiping, scrolling, refreshing etc.
The artefact blends into domestic surroundings (Figure 5), so as
to not interfere with natural conversation occurring in the house-
hold. Furthermore, the light from the lamp carves out a space for
CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany
Rajcic and McCormack
occupants to gather and converse, especially in the evening and
night time hours.
A smartphone was chosen to serve as an intervention to the
typical habitual behaviours and gestures associated with the device.
The morning SMS is designed to reach the participant in their first
moments of the day, encouraging reflection and re-framing of the
previous day’s events. The daily reading and interpreting of the
message contributes towards one’s waking ritual, prompting the
participant to proactively reflect and contemplate their life. SMS
technology is utilized as it sits outside of social media applications,
creating a conceptual division between Message Ritual, and other
morning routines that are mediated through a smartphone.
4
EVALUATION
Our approach to evaluation of Message Ritual is inspired by Barad’s
diffractive methodology, in turn inspired by feminist writing of
Haraway [34], and proposed by Frauenberger as an epistemological
framework in HCI [27]. Rather than striving to determine whether
an artefact works at achieving a hypothesised outcome, we instead
strive to understand what an artefact becomes as it is put out into
the world. This is done by not only recognising sameness across data
(e.g. via thematic coding), but through identification and exploration
of the differences. The application of diffractive methodologies in
HCI has received increased interest recent years. For example, Lazar
et al. apply three distinct analyses to the same set of qualitative
data gathered from workshops exploring “technology for aging”.
The results from each technique were then read through each other
to better understand how the apparatus (the empirical analyses
in this case) co-constitutes the phenomena being observed [43].
In other case studies, diffraction has been used as a framework
through which to approach artistic practice [49, 68]. The diversity
in approaches to diffractive analysis demonstrates that it does not
encompass a fixed methodology, but rather an open reading of
data ‘through’ or alongside other materials such as “texts, personal
experiences, other data” [26].
Message Ritual was not designed with any specific purpose in
a given household, but rather to explore the open-ended possibili-
ties of living with a non-human system with its own agency and
autonomy. Taken into consideration during the conception and
design process were general themes that relate to the material and
functional affordances of the system, which include conversation,
language, memory, ritual, domesticity and of course, light. In the
following evaluation, we adopt a diffractive methodology in the
analysing interview data gathered across four households living
with the lamp. In particular, we are interested in how the lamp
becomes different things when entering into assemblage with dif-
fering household configurations. For this reason we have selected
households that span a range of domestic living situations, from
single member households to shared living arrangements.
4.1
Study Design
To study the system’s entanglements with people, 10 participants
(6 male, 4 female) across four households were recruited to live
with the lamp over a two week period. Recruitment was from mem-
bers of our University and through personal contacts. 7 of the 10
participants were known to the researchers personally, but none
were familiar with the work or its theoretical foundations at the
commencement of the study. No remuneration was provided for
participation. Participants’ ages ranged from 27 – 36 with a me-
dian of 31. We acknowledge this is a relatively narrow age range,
determined largely by the demographics of participants who vol-
unteered to be involved in the study. Participants were asked to
naturally incorporate Message Ritual into their daily routine, turn-
ing the lamp on when engaging in conversation, and off during
quiet hours, or when they required privacy. Each morning, the
participants received a unique poem via SMS at the approximate
average wake time of the household. Prior to the study, participants
were made aware of the basic functioning of the lamp – namely
that speech is recorded on the device and then transcribed, with
the resulting transcripts being sent to a remote server for analysis
and poetry generation. Participants were comprehensively briefed
on any privacy concerns, including the treatment of audio files, and
the privacy policies of third party providers. The study received
full ethics approval from our University’s ethics panel prior to
commencing.
The details of each household configuration can be seen in Figure
6. The households were selected to cover a variety of living arrange-
ments. Households 1 (H1) and 2 (H2) both comprise of shared living
situation between friends, with 3 and 4 household members respec-
tively. The primary difference between H1 and H2 is the length of
relationship, with members of H2 having lived together for over 5
years, where H1 is comprised of relatively new relationships. House-
hold 3 (H3) comprises of a couple who have been living together
for 4 years, with their dog Tim-Tam (TT). Finally Household 4 (H4)
contains a single member P10, who has recently moved country
and is settling into a new living situation.
At the conclusion of the study, participants took part in a semi-
structured interview regarding their overall experience living with
lamp. Their responses were thematically coded to identify common
themes and experiences across participants. The interview data
was again read ‘through’ these emergent themes, along with rel-
evant theory, researchers’ personal experiences, and experiences
of participants. In the following diffractive analysis, we identify
and unpack the shared and the distinct experiences across both
individual participants and collective households, aiming to explore
what the lamp becomes as it enters into assemblage with households
and researchers.
The study is exploratory in nature, designed in order to gather
key insights into the design considerations of the system at the
initial stages of its entanglement with human participants. As a
consequence, the study has a limited scope in both number of
households, and length of participation. Given these limitations, we
nevertheless feel that such exploratory investigation is crucial in
the building of personal and domestic technologies, and ultimately
calls for critical reflection and ethical accountability at the early
stages of development. We intend for the insights gained in this
exploratory study to inform the subsequent design iterations of
Message Ritual, as well as future evaluation methodologies.
4.2
Habit and Ritual
Parts of the study were coincidentally held during periods of ‘lock-
down’ as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Several participants
Message Ritual: A Posthuman Account of Living with Lamp
CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany
H1 Housemates P1-P3 living together for 1.5 years
H2 Housemates P4-P7 living together for 5 years
H3 Partners P8 and P9 living together for 4 years with their dog Tim-Tam
H4 Single occupant P10 currently settling into life after moving overseas 
P10
H4
P1
P2
P3
H1
P4
P5
P6
P7
H2
P8
P9
TT
H3
R1
R2
R1 Lead author and designer
R2 Second author
Figure 6: Diagram illustrating the configuration of each household, including information on the pre-existing relationships
between participants and researchers
suggested that their experiences with the lamp were intrinsically
tied to their experience of increased social distancing and isolation.
One participant noted that in lockdown, it’s difficult to “differen-
tiate between days” (P1, P6), and so the daily ritual of conversing,
reading messages, and reflecting offered a “point of difference” (P1)
against the monotonous backdrop of social isolation. All partici-
pants valued the addition of Message Ritual to their regular routines,
which was most notably demonstrated in the disappointment ex-
perienced on the occasion that the lamp failed to send a message
(due to insufficient conversation). A majority of participants used
the word “disappointment” to describe how they felt even though,
when prompted, they found it difficult to explain what exactly they
missed.
Viewed through Han’s conceptualisation of ritual as the furnish-
ing of time, we can see that Message Ritual offers structured time
in which participants are allowed to linger. The poetry is not con-
sumed, but rather it “endures” [33], sometimes opaque and difficult
to parse, participants described dwelling on their morning message
from anywhere between 30 seconds to 30 minutes. Similarly, the
time required to produce sufficient conversation is not trivial, and
participants found themselves carving out time for more in-depth
conversation centred around the lamp, with H1 structuring discus-
sions around meal times, away from TV and other distractions.
P2: “We met more often at the dining table to talk,
whereas usually we would just talk in passing in the
house, it kind of gave us a central point to have those
conversations...it’s been really nice”
Similarly, participants of H3 found more time was spent con-
versing around the dinner table (where the lamp was situated) so
as to “give it more conversation” (P8). In asking something of par-
ticipants (sufficient conversation, the reading of poetry), the lamp
in return offered regular and reliable moments of structured time,
that largely came as respite from the overabundance of time that
lockdown affords.
P2 and P3 shared their recent efforts of reducing the amount
of time they spent on their smartphones, citing social distancing
as the reason for falling into undesirable habits. Both participants
describe the “losing” (P2) or “destroying” (P3) of time that occurs
when on their device, both illustrating the material interventions
required when sheer willpower was not enough. From leaving the
phone in a different room, to the adoption of a second “boring”
(P2) phone that is used exclusively throughout the working week.
Although not explicitly referencing the lamp, such conversations
further contrasted the types of agencies at play between human
and machine. Returning to DeJong’s account of the ‘Feed’ [20], we
here see the trace of non-human agencies and their very real and
material effects. Both P2 and P3 expressed that their engagement
with Message Ritual did not have any effect (positive or negative)
on this desire to limit or disrupt phone use, and that these material
interventions were a necessary measure to exert their own agency
in their relationships with the ‘Feed’.
4.3
Memory and Identity
The interpreting of poetry came naturally to all participants, who
were each at times able to meaningfully connect the poetry back to
conversations from the previous day. At other times, participants
saw no obvious connection, and instead were reminded of moments
from childhood (P1), of friends and family they hadn’t seen in a
while (P4, P5), of past holidays in Rome (P7) (Figure 7), of books
they had read (P3). A number of participants viewed the messages
as the lens through which to remember previous conversations,
describing them as a “puzzle” (P6) to decode, met with a “sense
of satisfication” (P2) once having solved it. Others struggled with
the uncertainty of their own memories, reflecting on whether the
lamp’s memory was sometimes more accurate than their own.
CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany
Rajcic and McCormack
Figure 7: Message received by P7
P4: “It’s like the lamp is reflecting back memories
through its own lens, right, which is different to mine.
Would you say it’s an objective lens, or has its own
bias?”
Interviewer: “What do you think?”
P4: “It feels more objective but maybe that’s not the
case. To me it reflects what is. It reflects what we put
into it.”
The tendency to perceive the machine as being altogether more
objective, rational, or accurate than the human has roots in early
computing culture [47]. Barad’s account of the role of measuring
apparatus provides an understanding of the lamp as that which
records memories. In the way that ‘the apparatus is an insepa-
rable part of the observed phenomenon.’ [2], so too is the lamp
itself inseparable from the memories constructed and reconstructed
through its intra-action with participants. In this way, the phenom-
enon of memory recollection is performed with and through one’s
relationship with the lamp, other house members, and researchers
within an assemblage. P6 describes how the lamp’s language was
entangled with their own language, and with the language of other
house members, to the extent that it became impossible to differen-
tiate or trace back to a single source. Instead, remembering through
the imagery and narratives in the poetry represented a kind of
collective memory within the household.
For other participants, the lamp’s capacity to provoke recollec-
tion had less to do with the specific memories surfacing, and more
to do with the very act of remembering. In this way, the lamp served
as a “reminder” (P2, P6) to remember, which at times led partici-
pants on a path of reflection, introspection and self-awareness at
the outset of their day. Several participants recited the cascade of
thoughts that followed the reading of a poem. In one example, a
poem urging P7 to be “open and honest” with themselves led to
them contemplating their feelings towards a recent ex-partner. The
lamp provided further “affirmation” (P7) of existing feelings centred
around the decision to end the relationship earlier in the week.
In [79], the authors propose that the primary function of Auto-
biographical Memory (AM) is to form a coherent sense of one’s
identity. Personal memories are said to shape one’s current sense of
self, and in turn this self-identity influences how past experiences
are remembered. In a similar vein, [19] proposes that autobiograph-
ical memories are dynamically retrieved and reconstructed to serve
the current goals, beliefs and image of the working self. Such ap-
proaches to understanding AM highlight its crucial role in the
sense-making of the present: in order for the present self to remain
coherent, the past must be perpetually malleable. This organisation
of autobiographical memories to construct a consistent, continuous
subjective experience can be likened to the authoring of an autobi-
ographical narrative – a narrative that is continuously subject to
revision. We found that for most participants, the value of the lamp
is not in its ability to produce an accurate summary of the previous
day’s conversation, but rather in its proclivity to encourage such
authoring – often giving participants the language through which
to frame their recent experiences.
4.4
Relationships
The majority of participants found the lamp to be a good “con-
versation starter” (P7), with households H1-H3 regularly sharing
and discussing their respective poems. Along with being given a
“reason” (P6) to converse more regularly, participants now too had
“something extra to talk about” (P2). After a while, this process
became “cyclical” (P5), with the poetry leading “into more conver-
sation for the lamp for the next day” (P5). This shared experience
fostered a “sense of togetherness” (P7) across the larger households
(H1, H2). Returning again to Han’s account of ritual – it is not
just that the rituals allow for lingering in time, but they also entail
“community” [33, p.43].
Participants of H3 similarly describe the lamp as a social agent,
however not necessarily fostering relationships between household
members, but rather the relationships with house guests. The lamp
presented an added novelty, an “extra guest at [their] dinner parties”
(P8). P8 and P9 reported that their guests would alter their behaviour
around the lamp; at times they would check that the lamp had
caught what they said, at other times guests would speak directly
to the lamp in an effort to influence the next morning’s poetry.
P8: “Maybe it worked more as a social tool for us
in that we enjoyed most when we had people over,
and we really enjoyed sharing the poem, and then we
would have a conversation with that group the next
day”
P9: “People were excited about it the next day, they’d
ask ‘Did you get the poem yet?”’
It takes two (or more) people to make a conversation, raising the
question of how a person living alone might engage with Message
Ritual. In contrast to the relatively social households H1-H3, H4
comprises of a single participant (P10) who has recently moved
country and is settling in to a new living situation. In the absence
of other people, P10 attempted to include the lamp in external
communication, like speaking “on the phone”, listening to “voice
Message Ritual: A Posthuman Account of Living with Lamp
CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany
Figure 8: Lamp pictured alongside message received by P1 on the first day of the study
messages and podcasts” (P10). P10 also describes their efforts to talk
directly to the lamp: “I was speaking to myself as well, I normally
don’t do that intentionally, but the past few weeks I’ve been like,
okay, let it out, just talk to yourself” (P10).
Language is often placed in opposition to the material under
representationalism, which adopts a binary of words and things;
signifier and signified. Yet, as Clark describes, language itself has a
materiality; we encounter ‘words in the air, symbols on a printed
page’ [17]. Language is not merely a vehicle through which we
express our inner thoughts, but a form of computation in itself.
The supra-communicative view of language, originally pioneered
by Vygotsky [74], proposes that language is a tool that guides
behaviour and structures action. For P10, spoken language was not
solely used as a method of communication, but as a tool to regulate
mood, or structure thought. P10 describes the lamp as a sort of
spoken diary:
P10: “Normally I don’t practice that daily. But yes, I
have for the past few weeks, like I said, it’s refresh-
ingly easy. I write diaries and I’ve done that probably
20 years now, Almost daily, so for me it was just kind
of a nice to see it in an object instead of my actual
physical diary...I was able to be vulnerable with it.”
What role did the lamp take in the existing households? At first,
participants describe an uneasiness with the introduction of the
lamp into their space. Unsure of how the lamp would utilise their
language, participants were markedly more “self-conscious” (P1)
and self-censoring at the beginning of the study.
P3: “ In the early days there probably was less talking
around the lamp, and then maybe towards end that
sort of dropped away...”
Interviewer: "What do you think changed?"
P3: “Probably because the poems kept coming in and
y’know, [I was] having fun with them”
As the poems began arriving (Figure 8), and familiarity grew, all
participants started to become comfortable in its presence. The
relationship developed towards the lamp itself varied across house-
holds, with participants describing it as a “companianable”, “a good
listener” (P7), and the new “housemate” (P2, P4, P5); “it made me feel
like I have the floor” (P5). P7 described feeling flattered, like they
were the lamp’s “muse” (P7). Other participants describe moments
in which they speak directly to the lamp, for example greeting it
in the morning or asking it questions directly (P1). A majority of
participants found themselves contemplating the thoughts or mood
of the lamp, ascribing to it some level of intention, autonomy and
agency; the lamp is “not a human being, but something, it’s doing
something” (P7).
Perceptions of agency and autonomy are increasingly important
in this new era of human-machine relationships, particularly when
those relationships involve AI. The traditional anthropomorphisms
of ‘smart devices’, such as disembodied voices, skewmorphisms,
or human iconography serve to reinforce the notion that artificial
intelligence is akin to human intelligence. This sets up expectations
of intentionality and free-will that we associate with the ‘theory of
mind’ type of autonomy [8, Ch.9], rather than other, potentially new
forms of agency and autonomy possible in advanced technological
systems.
4.5
Transparency
The participants each had varying levels of knowledge and experi-
ence with AI technologies, with some participants directly involved
with the development and design of similar systems (P2, P9), and
others claiming almost no understanding of AI (P1, P8, P10). Gaps
in working knowledge of the capabilities of AI technologies led to
CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany
Rajcic and McCormack
Figure 9: Message received by P8
participants often over or underestimating the functionality of the
lamp. In reference to a particular poem with the word “barking”,
P9 asked whether the lamp was able to correctly tag and interpret
their dog’s barking from the previous day. P9 also considered that
perhaps they instead might have used that word in conversation. In
instances where the lamp’s messages were unexpectedly dark and
melancholy, P8 began to wonder whether the lamp was “picking up
on something” (P8) beyond merely their language, like the tone of
voice, or the “vibe” (P8) of the room. Rather than immediately reject
the poetry that they could not clearly associate to the previous day,
P8 instead read further into the lamp’s capacity for ‘knowing’. In
another instance, P8 recalls receiving a message (Figure 9) that con-
tained an uncanny coincidence. P8 and P9 had in fact been living
together for 4 years, yet they quickly rejected the perceived tone
and intention of the message. What was ultimately written off as
coincidence, nevertheless generated an emotional reaction, and led
P8 to question where exactly lies accountability of such generative
systems; stating that “this would really suck if you were the one
that wanted to [break up]” (P8)
The lack of transparency surrounding generative AI systems
contributes to both its creative potential (or perhaps, illusion), and
to the ethically challenging aspects of its application in domestic
and personal contexts. On one hand, this ambiguity lends itself
to different expectations: the opening up of new possibilities and
alternative perspectives. However this same ambiguity may also
lead to confronting, negative, or disturbing experiences. In our case,
increasing transparency of the system (i.e. explicitly reiterating data
collection and storage procedures) relieved much of the concern
for participants around privacy (P1, P3). Revealing the underly-
ing transcripts to participants (P8, P9) of H3 furthermore brought
clarity to their questions around perceived epistemic capabilities
of the lamp, and perhaps highlighted the extent to which these
observations, memories, and feelings were co-constructed through
their entanglement.
4.6
Entanglements
P1, P3, and P8 were not familiar with previous research nor with
the researchers at the beginning of the study, whereas all other
participants were considered colleagues or personal contacts. It
quickly became evident how the entanglement of the researchers in
this assemblage influenced the perceptions and attitudes towards
the lamp. In contrast with traditional analyses, our diffractive ap-
proach allows us to unpack the consequence of this difference,
acknowledging that such research can not be not carried out in a
vacuum.
P1 and P3 both likened the lamp to the famously cursed late 90’s
children’s toy, Furby [46], speaking to the perceived unfamiliar-
ity or alien-like quality of the lamp. P8 reported never personally
switching the lamp on or off, leaving that task to their partner who
had more familiarity with the system (P9).
At times, participants felt guilt towards the lamp when they failed
to turn it on for a day (P2, P6), although it was unclear towards
who exactly the guilt was directed:
P2: “It kind of felt like we failed, actually, we didn’t
do the task we were supposed to do...”
Interviewer: “You failed me? Or you failed the lamp?
Or you failed yourself?”
P2: “Good question, um, I think we failed ourselves”
Participants with whom the researchers had a closer relationship
to (P2, P4-7, P10) instead presented with a tendency to perceive the
lamp as friendly and “warm” (P4), being less concerned with issues
of privacy and overall more receptive to its language.
P5: “It was an extension of you”
P4: “It was like a housemate”
P5: “We also spoke about you to the lamp, if you
came up we would address the lamp directly as ’your
mother”’
Similarly, while using the lamp as a spoken diary, P10 at the same
time likened it to a kind of mediated communication with the
researchers; “I was trying to share my gossip with you, I was giving
all the juicy details to you” (P10).
The lamp served not only as an extension of its designer, but led
to the further entanglement of researchers with both households
through regular check-ins. The lamp, although undeniably exerting
its own agency, seemed to also borrow agency from the humans
that created it; trust towards the lamp was an extension of the
designers trust, guilt felt towards the lamp was guilt towards the
researchers, and the ‘success’ of the study. This borrowed agency
and trust heavily skewed the perceptions of Message Ritual causing
participants to be more receptive and forgiving of the system. As
raised by participants of H3, if the lamp was instead a “consumer
product” (P8), their experiences would perhaps be more troubling.
Emancipated from a sense of human accountability and care, the
lamp’s messages could be perceived with an entirely different tone
or intention. Returning to the discussion on ethical issues and of
increased transparency of AI systems, we see that this transparency
does not concern only the technical processes at play, but the tracing
of human involvement.
Ethical concerns around data-collection practices can typically
be traced back to the (human-led) corporations that employ them
for profit [80]. As discussed in [13], in order to gather data, “the true
purpose of data-driven value propositions is often concealed, and
individuals are coerced into using them. This constitutes exploita-
tion and constrains the ability of individuals and organizations to
act independently” [13]. Building on a comment from P8, if the lamp
Message Ritual: A Posthuman Account of Living with Lamp
CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany
was indeed a consumer product, this would raise serious concerns
around the true value proposition of the service, and whether or
not the hyperpersonalised nature of the system would inevitably
lead to a unethical implications.
On the final day of the study, participants of H2 each recount
receiving what they interpreted as a “goodbye message” (P4-7) from
the lamp (Figure 10). P4 expressed that “it felt like the lamp is gonna
miss me, it really created an emotion there”, speaking again to the
participants proclivity to narrativize their interactions with the
lamp. In contrast, participants of H3 instead experienced a grow-
ing disconnect from the lamp’s messages as the study progressed:
“The longer it was learning from us, the more gibberish the poems
became” (P8), “I think we attribute it to all the poetry being dark”
(P9).
The decision to include AI technologies brings with it an in-
herent unpredictability; with increased autonomy and agency the
tracing of agencies across these human-machine relationships be-
comes increasingly blurred and complex. The study’s findings illus-
trate the variety and nuance in experience across participants and
households, which speaks to this unpredictable nature, and further
motivating the turn to diffractive methodologies.
Across all households, the relationship developed by participants
towards the lamp over the duration of the study was inextricably
linked to the relationships participants have with each other and
with the researchers/designers. Understanding the lamp’s becoming
can only be done through the tracing of these relationships. At the
conclusion of the study, H1 and H2 in particular expressed strong
reluctance in surrendering the lamp, with some participants citing
the daily poetry as the reason, while others set to miss the lamp’s
presence in their home. What participants are reluctant to let go of
may be not the lamp as a solitary object, but the way in which it
enriches the wider network of relationships that surround it.
5
DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK
“This is not to say that if practitioners construct their
research from messy diffractive methodologies, they
are not accountable for their contributing outcomes.
Rather, this underscores the importance and ethics
of the journey not over but alongside the destination
because we too are reconfigurable through our praxis
in ways possibly more consequential than any other.”
— Key et al. [39]
The methodological approach taken in the preceding evalua-
tion was a departure from traditional analyses in that it was not
attempting to reach a singular conclusion or set of findings, nor
to validate a particular hypothesis (i.e. was Message Ritual success-
ful or not?). The results emerging from such ‘messy’ methods are
difficult to reduce to a single overarching narrative, as (naturally)
each participant had a unique personal experience with the lamp.
But more importantly, answering a hypothesis or question (‘Yes,
it was successful’ or ‘no, it wasn’t successful’) does not contribute
to the goal of understanding the possibilities of what the artefact
could become. We found that by considering the multiplicity of
experiences (both their similarities and differences) and attempt-
ing to understand the configurations that led to those experiences,
the methodology assists in identifying the potential value and risk
brought about by the artefact in question.
In lieu of a singular conclusion, the diffractive analysis led us,
as designers, to better inform our conceptualisation of the artefact.
The lamp is foremost a social object, rather than an solitary arte-
fact, a mere technological device or tool. A number of participants
described the lamp as a welcome addition to their life, easily fit-
ting in with existing routines and rituals of the household. The
moments of structured time carved out by the lamp seemed to offer
comfort in the particularly stressful time of pandemic lockdown,
along with greater connection in the midst of social isolation. As
noted by a number of participants, it is rare in the current state of
society that they find quiet moments to reflect. We found that this
recollection of memories, thoughts, and feelings not only supports
memory, but in remembering we are also engaging with the au-
thoring and re-authoring of our narrative identity. Message Ritual
provided participants with the space in which to remember, along
with the language and concepts to weave those memories into a
broader narrative. The feelings experienced towards the lamp are
difficult to fully decouple from the feelings towards other household
members and the researchers. Feelings of trepidation, responsibility,
guilt, affection, and attachment appear to be distributed across the
broader assemblage. This is not to diminish the lamp’s agency in
such phenomena, but rather to acknowledge that such an artefact
cannot be fully decoupled from the material conditions in which it
was conceived, and in which it is studied.
The diffractive analysis furthermore reoriented our approach as
researchers to evaluation of AI technologies. Bringing attention to
the full spectrum of participant experiences led to a keener aware-
ness of the ethical considerations surrounding such open-ended
systems. The introduction of AI technologies to deeply intimate
and personal spaces carries with it an inherent risk, particularly
when those technologies exert their own generative autonomy and
agency. We attempted to mitigate these risks through transparency
about the capabilities of the system, and informing participants
about the open nature of interpretation of machine generated po-
etry. Ethical accountability involves not only an increased trans-
parency of the the underlying technical processes, but similar re-
quirements extend to the wider network of those who enable and
proliferate these technologies.
Lastly, the analysis provided valuable insights into many aspects
of the current design, including what might be changed or improved
in future iterations of Message Ritual. Feedback from participants
on extra functionality that they would like to see in the current
design was particularly informative. Several participants wished
that the lamp could be more “portable” (P1, P3, P5) such that it
could catch conversations occurring in other rooms of the house.
Extending to a network of lamps—potentially of varying sizes and
shapes—that can live in different rooms or easily portable would
be one way of addressing this need. Other participants asked for
the mapping between their language and the lamp’s poetry to be
more complex (P6, P7), incorporating more of their language (P8,
P9), and potentially at different stages of the poetry rather than
only at the beginning. We are currently developing more advanced
mapping techniques such as the use of n-grams, and dynamically
incorporating participant’s language in the poetry generation to
improve the mapping between conversation and poetry produced.
CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany
Rajcic and McCormack
Figure 10: Goodbye messages received by participants of Household 2 on the last day of the study
This preliminary evaluation informed both future design and
evaluation improvements for Message Ritual. The exploratory na-
ture, limited duration and relatively narrow age demographic of
the current study invites a more detailed, longitudinal study to
further understand the variety of ways the lamp can become with
others. This would include a more diverse range of households,
relationships, and demographics—where participants live with the
lamp for extended periods (months, or even years)—to better un-
derstand if and how the lamp might become an ongoing ritual.
Other factors, such as homes with multi-lingual conversations and
transient household members will also be considered (for technical
and logistic reasons they were not considered for this study).
6
CONCLUSION
We have shown how the application of entanglement methodologies
to the design, development and evaluation of a novel technological
artefact can benefit our understanding of the wider implications and
considerations that emerging technologies facilitate. We draw from
posthumanist theories to inform the conceptual basis, the design
considerations, and the methodological approach to understanding
how an artefact becomes with the world. This design process en-
courages consideration of the multiple implicated relationships as
they evolve over time. It entails designing not for a specific outcome
or function, but in anticipation of how different human-machine
relationships might materialise. The presented evaluation favours
a diffractive approach to understanding qualitative data; not focus-
ing on whether the design was ‘successful’, but on how different
configurations lead to the artefact becoming different things [28].
Message Ritual is an domestic, ambient and intelligent system
that encourages the framing and re-framing of memories through
generated poetics. It does this by engaging members of a household
through daily rituals centred around language, both shared and
private, carried out with intention, and imbued with meaning. Han
doesn’t necessarily call for a return to ritual, rather simply that
“rituals serve as a background against which our present times may
be seen to stand out more clearly” [33, p.vi]. In this paper, we have
offered an example of how ritual interaction is contrasted with
many of the current ways we relate to technology. With this work,
we are not attempting to return to, or reproduce the ritual practices
observed across societies past and present, but instead to offer new
rituals that produce shared meaning in human and non-human
assemblages; new rituals in an increasingly posthuman society.
Through diffractive analysis, we outlined the experiences and
perceptions of participants living with lamp; tracing the entangle-
ments between the lamp, participants, and researchers. By diffract-
ing interview data with theory, and again with personal reflection,
we teased out our understanding of the lamp’s becoming, identify-
ing some of the possible roles the Message Ritual system can take:
Lamp as diary, as confidant, as new housemate, as morning ritual,
as conversation starter, as consumer product, as a technological
extension of its (human) designers.
In the wake of our analysis, we must ask ourselves as researchers
and designers, are these the kind of relationships we want to foster?
A diffractive approach allowed us to trace a spectrum of participant
experiences to better identify the potential value and risk of an
open-ended system such as Message Ritual. In doing so, ethical con-
siderations were brought the fore, and led to an increased sense of
accountability towards the introduction of AI technologies into do-
mestic contexts. We hope that the novel approach presented in this
paper inspires further interest in the development of entanglement
methodologies in HCI research.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported by Australian Research Council Grants
FT170100033 and DP220101223.
REFERENCES
[1] Karen Barad. 2003. Posthumanist performativity: Toward an understanding of
how matter comes to matter. Signs: Journal of women in culture and society 28, 3
(2003), 801–831.
[2] Karen Barad. 2014. Diffracting diffraction: Cutting together-apart. parallax 20, 3
(2014), 168–187.
[3] Eric PS Baumer and Jed R Brubaker. 2017. Post-userism. In Proceedings of the
2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 6291–6303.
[4] Oladayo Bello and Sherali Zeadally. 2019. Toward efficient smartification of the
Internet of Things (IoT) services. Future Generation Computer Systems 92 (2019),
663–673.
[5] Gabrielle Benabdallah. 2020. Sybil: A Divinatory Home Device. In Companion
Publication of the 2020 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference (DIS’ 20
Companion). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 275–279.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3393914.3395857
[6] David Benyon and Oli Mival. 2011. From Human-Computer Interactions to
Human-Companion Relationships. In Proceedings of the First International Confer-
ence on Intelligent Interactive Technologies and Multimedia (IITM ’10). Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1145/
1963564.1963565
[7] Timothy W. Bickmore and Rosalind W. Picard. 2005. Establishing and Maintaining
Long-Term Human-Computer Relationships. ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact.
12, 2 (jun 2005), 293–327. https://doi.org/10.1145/1067860.1067867
[8] Margaret A. Boden. 2012. Foreward to Computers and Creativity. In Computers
and Creativity, Jon McCormack and Mark d’Inverno (Eds.). Springer, Berlin;
Heidelberg, v–vi. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-31727-9
[9] Susanne Bødker. 2006. When second wave HCI meets third wave challenges. In
Proceedings of the 4th Nordic conference on Human-computer interaction: changing
roles. 1–8.
[10] Susanne Bødker. 2015. Third-wave HCI, 10 years later—participation and sharing.
Interactions 22, 5 (2015), 24–31.
[11] Rishi Bommasani, Drew A. Hudson, Ehsan Adeli, Russ Altman, Simran Arora,
Sydney von Arx, Michael S. Bernstein, Jeannette Bohg, Antoine Bosselut, Emma
Brunskill, Erik Brynjolfsson, Shyamal Buch, Dallas Card, Rodrigo Castellon,
Niladri Chatterji, Annie Chen, Kathleen Creel, Jared Quincy Davis, Dora Dem-
szky, Chris Donahue, Moussa Doumbouya, Esin Durmus, Stefano Ermon, John
Message Ritual: A Posthuman Account of Living with Lamp
CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany
Etchemendy, Kawin Ethayarajh, Li Fei-Fei, Chelsea Finn, Trevor Gale, Lauren
Gillespie, Karan Goel, Noah Goodman, Shelby Grossman, Neel Guha, Tatsunori
Hashimoto, Peter Henderson, John Hewitt, Daniel E. Ho, Jenny Hong, Kyle Hsu,
Jing Huang, Thomas Icard, Saahil Jain, Dan Jurafsky, Pratyusha Kalluri, Siddharth
Karamcheti, Geoff Keeling, Fereshte Khani, Omar Khattab, Pang Wei Kohd, Mark
Krass, Ranjay Krishna, Rohith Kuditipudi, Ananya Kumar, Faisal Ladhak, Mina
Lee, Tony Lee, Jure Leskovec, Isabelle Levent, Xiang Lisa Li, Xuechen Li, Tengyu
Ma, Ali Malik, Christopher D. Manning, Suvir Mirchandani, Eric Mitchell, Zanele
Munyikwa, Suraj Nair, Avanika Narayan, Deepak Narayanan, Ben Newman, Allen
Nie, Juan Carlos Niebles, Hamed Nilforoshan, Julian Nyarko, Giray Ogut, Laurel
Orr, Isabel Papadimitriou, Joon Sung Park, Chris Piech, Eva Portelance, Christo-
pher Potts, Aditi Raghunathan, Rob Reich, Hongyu Ren, Frieda Rong, Yusuf
Roohani, Camilo Ruiz, Jack Ryan, Christopher Ré, Dorsa Sadigh, Shiori Sagawa,
Keshav Santhanam, Andy Shih, Krishnan Srinivasan, Alex Tamkin, Rohan Taori,
Armin W. Thomas, Florian Tramèr, Rose E. Wang, William Wang, Bohan Wu,
Jiajun Wu, Yuhuai Wu, Sang Michael Xie, Michihiro Yasunaga, Jiaxuan You,
Matei Zaharia, Michael Zhang, Tianyi Zhang, Xikun Zhang, Yuhui Zhang, Lucia
Zheng, Kaitlyn Zhou, and Percy Liang. 2021. On the Opportunities and Risks of
Foundation Models. arXiv:cs.LG/2108.07258 https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.07258
[12] Rosi Braidotti. 2019. Posthuman knowledge. John Wiley & Sons.
[13] Christoph F Breidbach and Paul Maglio. 2020. Accountable algorithms? The ethi-
cal implications of data-driven business models. Journal of Service Management
31, 2 (2020), 163–185.
[14] Kieran Browne and Ben Swift. 2018. The Other Side: Algorithm as Ritual in
Artificial Intelligence. In Extended Abstracts of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ’18). Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1145/3170427.3188404
[15] David Chatting, David S. Kirk, Paulina Yurman, and Jo-Anne Bichard. 2017.
Ritual machine V: Where are you. In Proceedings of the 3rd Conference on Bien-
nial Research Through Design. 131–147. http://davidchatting.com/familyrituals/
publications/WhereAreYou-objectoutcomes.pdf
[16] Amy Yo Sue Chen, William Odom, Ce Zhong, Henry Lin, and Tal Amram. 2019.
Chronoscope. In Proceedings of the 2019 on Designing Interactive Systems Confer-
ence. ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3322276.3322301
[17] Andy Clark. 1998. Magic words: How language augments human computation.
Language and thought: Interdisciplinary themes (1998), 162–183.
[18] Simon Colton, Alison Pease, Christian Guckelsberger, Jon McCormack, and
Maria Teresa Llano. 2020. On the Machine Condition and its Creative Expression.
(2020), 342–349. http://computationalcreativity.net/iccc20/papers/075-iccc20.pdf
[19] Martin A Conway. 2005. Memory and the self. Journal of memory and language
53, 4 (2005), 594–628.
[20] Dylan J DeJong. 2019. The Posthuman Reality of Feed-Based Social Media
Systems. (2019).
[21] Audrey Desjardins, Afroditi Psarra, and Bonnie A. Whiting. 2021. Voices and
Voids: Subverting Voice Assistant Systems through Performative Experiments. In
Creativity and Cognition (C&C ’21). Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, Article 29, 10 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3450741.3466807
[22] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. 2018. BERT:
Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding.
CoRR abs/1810.04805 (2018). arXiv:1810.04805 http://arxiv.org/abs/1810.04805
[23] Diana Domingues. 1999. Interactivity and ritual. In ACM SIGGRAPH 99 Electronic
art and animation catalog on - SIGGRAPH '99. ACM Press. https://doi.org/10.
1145/312379.312564
[24] Anthony Dunne and Fiona Raby. 2013. Speculative Everything: Design, Fiction,
and Social Dreaming. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA and London England.
[25] Laura Forlano. 2017. Posthumanism and Design. She Ji: The Journal of Design,
Economics, and Innovation 3, 1 (2017), 16–29. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sheji.2017.
08.001
[26] Nick J Fox and Pam Alldred. 2021. Applied Research, Diffractive Methodol-
ogy, and the Research-Assemblage: Challenges and Opportunities. Sociologi-
cal Research Online 0, 0 (2021), 13607804211029978.
https://doi.org/10.1177/
13607804211029978 arXiv:https://doi.org/10.1177/13607804211029978
[27] Christopher Frauenberger. 2019. Entanglement HCI: The Next Wave? ACM
Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI) 27, 1 (2019), 1–27.
[28] Christopher Frauenberger. 2020. Entanglement HCI The Next Wave? ACM
Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction 27, 1 (2020), 1–27. https://doi.org/
10.1145/3364998
[29] Christopher Frayling. 1993. Research in art and design. Royal College of Art
Research Papers 1, 1 (1993), 1–5.
[30] William Gaver. 2012. What Should We Expect from Research through Design?.
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI ’12). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 937–946.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2207676.2208538
[31] William Gaver, Mark Blythe, Andy Boucher, Nadine Jarvis, John Bowers, and
Peter Wright. 2010. The Prayer Companion: Openness and Specificity, Materiality
and Spirituality. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (CHI ’10). Association for Computing Machinery, New York,
NY, USA, 2055–2064. https://doi.org/10.1145/1753326.1753640
[32] Raffaela Giovagnoli. 2020. From Habits to We-Intentionality: Rituals as Social
Habits. In The Logic of Social Practices. Springer, 185–199.
[33] Byung-Chul Han. 2020. The Disappearance of Rituals: A Topology of the Present.
Wiley, Hoboken, New Jersey, USA.
[34] Donna Haraway. 1992. The promises of monsters: a regenerative politics for
inappropriate/d others. In Cultural Studies, Lawrence Grossberg, Cary Nelson,
and Paula Treichler (Eds.). Routledge, 295–337.
[35] Donna Haraway. 2006. A cyborg manifesto: Science, technology, and socialist-
feminism in the late 20th century. In The international handbook of virtual learning
environments. Springer, 117–158.
[36] Steve Harrison, Deborah Tatar, and Phoebe Sengers. 2007. The three paradigms of
HCI. In Alt. Chi. Session at the SIGCHI Conference on human factors in computing
systems San Jose, California, USA. 1–18.
[37] Sabrina Hauser, Doenja Oogjes, Ron Wakkary, and Peter-Paul Verbeek. 2018. An
Annotated Portfolio on Doing Postphenomenology Through Research Products.
In Proceedings of the 2018 Designing Interactive Systems Conference (DIS ’18).
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 459–471.
https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3196709.3196745
[38] Don Ihde. 1993. Philosophy of Technology: An Introduction. Paragon House
Publishers, New York, NY, USA.
[39] Cayla Key, Cally Gatehouse, and Nick Taylor. 2022. Feminist Care in the Anthro-
pocene: Packing and Unpacking Tensions in Posthumanist HCI. In Designing
Interactive Systems Conference. 677–692.
[40] David S. Kirk, David Chatting, Paulina Yurman, and Jo-Anne Bichard. 2016. Ritual
Machines I & II: Making Technology at Home. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’16). Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2474–2486. https://doi.org/10.1145/
2858036.2858424
[41] Sara Klüber, Diana Löffler, Marc Hassenzahl, Ilona Nord, and Jörn Hurtienne. 2020.
Designing Ritual Artifacts for Technology-Mediated Relationship Transitions.
In Proceedings of the Fourteenth International Conference on Tangible, Embedded,
and Embodied Interaction (TEI ’20). Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, 349–361. https://doi.org/10.1145/3374920.3374937
[42] Carl Knappett and Lambros Malafouris. 2008. Material Agency Towards a Non-
Anthropocentric Approach. New York, NY : Springer US : Imprint: Springer.
[43] Amanda Lazar, Ben Jelen, Alisha Pradhan, and Katie A. Siek. 2021. Adopting
Diffractive Reading to Advance HCI Research: A Case Study on Technology for
Aging. ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact. 28, 5, Article 32 (Aug. 2021), 29 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3462326
[44] Joseph CR Licklider. 1960. Man-computer symbiosis. IRE transactions on human
factors in electronics 1 (1960), 4–11.
[45] Kristina Mah, Lian Loke, and Luke Hespanhol. 2020. Designing With Ritual
Interaction. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth International Conference on Tangible,
Embedded, and Embodied Interaction. ACM.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3374920.
3374947
[46] Jackie Marsh. 2019. The Uncanny Valley Revisited: Play with the Internet of Toys.
Springer International Publishing, Cham, 47–65. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
030-10898-4_3
[47] C. Dianne Martin. 1993. The Myth of the Awesome Thinking Machine. Commun.
ACM 36, 4 (apr 1993), 120–133. https://doi.org/10.1145/255950.153587
[48] David T Neal, Wendy Wood, and Jeffrey M Quinn. 2006.
Habits—A repeat
performance. Current directions in psychological science 15, 4 (2006), 198–202.
[49] Charlotte Nordmoen and Andrew P McPherson. 2022. Making space for material
entanglements: A diffractive analysis of woodwork and the practice of making
an interactive system. In Designing Interactive Systems Conference. 415–423.
[50] Diana Nowacka, Katrin Wolf, Enrico Costanza, and David Kirk. 2018. Working
with an Autonomous Interface: Exploring the Output Space of an Interactive
Desktop Lamp. In Proceedings of the Twelfth International Conference on Tangi-
ble, Embedded, and Embodied Interaction (TEI ’18). Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1145/3173225.3173227
[51] William Odom, Mark Selby, Abigail Sellen, David Kirk, Richard Banks, and Tim
Regan. 2012. Photobox: on the design of a slow technology. In Proceedings of
the Designing Interactive Systems Conference on - DIS '12. ACM Press, 665–668.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2317956.2318055
[52] William Odom, Ron Wakkary, Jeroen Hol, Bram Naus, Pepijn Verburg, Tal Amram,
and Amy Yo Sue Chen. 2019. Investigating Slowness as a Frame to Design Longer-
Term Experiences with Personal Data. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.
3300264
[53] William T. Odom, Abigail J. Sellen, Richard Banks, David S. Kirk, Tim Regan,
Mark Selby, Jodi L. Forlizzi, and John Zimmerman. 2014. Designing for Slowness,
Anticipation and Re-Visitation: A Long Term Field Study of the Photobox. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI ’14). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1961–1970.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557178
[54] Emmi Parviainen and Marie Louise Juul Søndergaard. 2020. Experiential Qualities
of Whispering with Voice Assistants. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’20). Association for Computing
CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany
Rajcic and McCormack
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376187
[55] Larissa Pschetz and Richard Banks. 2013. Long living chair. In CHI EA ’13:
CHI ’13 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 2983–2986.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2468356.2479590
[56] Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya
Sutskever. 2019. Language models are unsupervised multitask learners. URL
https://openai. com/blog/better-language-models (2019).
[57] Nina Rajcic and Jon McCormack. 2020. Mirror Ritual: An Affective Interface for
Emotional Self-Reflection. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems. ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376625
[58] Nina Rajcic and Jon McCormack. 2020. Mirror Ritual: Human-Machine Co-
Construction of Emotion. Proceedings of the Fourteenth International Conference
on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied Interaction (Feb 2020). https://doi.org/10.
1145/3374920.3375293
[59] Ursula Rao. 2006. Ritual in society. In Theorizing Rituals, Volume 1: Issues, Topics,
Approaches, Concepts. Brill, 143–160.
[60] Anuradha Reddy, A. Baki Kocaballi, Iohanna Nicenboim, Marie Louise Juul Søn-
dergaard, Maria Luce Lupetti, Cayla Key, Chris Speed, Dan Lockton, Elisa Gi-
accardi, Francisca Grommé, Holly Robbins, Namrata Primlani, Paulina Yurman,
Shanti Sumartojo, Thao Phan, Viktor Bedö, and Yolande Strengers. 2021. Making
Everyday Things Talk: Speculative Conversations into the Future of Voice Inter-
faces at Home. In Extended Abstracts of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems (CHI EA ’21). Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, Article 23, 16 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3411763.3450390
[61] Robert Rosenberger and Peter-Paul Verbeek. 2015. A Field Guide to Postphe-
nomenology. In Postphenomenological investigations: essays onhuman-technology
relations, Robert Rosenberger and Peter-Paul Verbeek (Eds.). Lexington Books,
Lanham, 9–41.
[62] Robert Rosenberger and Peter Peter-Paul Verbeek. 2015. Postphenomenological
investigations: essays on human-technology relations. Lexington Books.
[63] Jerry Lee Rosiek and Jimmy Snyder. 2020. Narrative Inquiry and New Materialism:
Stories as (Not Necessarily Benign) Agents. Qualitative Inquiry 26, 10 (2020),
1151–62. https://doi.org/10.1177/1077800418784326
[64] Marco C. Rozendaal, Betti Marenko, and William Odom (Eds.). 2021. Designing
Smart Objects in Everyday Life. Bloomsbury Publishing Plc., London, UK.
[65] Gerard Salton and Christopher Buckley. 1988. Term-weighting approaches in
automatic text retrieval. Information Processing & Management 24, 5 (1988),
513–523. https://doi.org/10.1016/0306-4573(88)90021-0
[66] Corina Sas, Steve Whittaker, and John Zimmerman. 2016. Design for Rituals of
Letting Go. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction 23, 4 (sep 2016),
1–37. https://doi.org/10.1145/2926714
[67] Gloria L. Schaab. 2013. Relational Ontology. Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht,
1974–1975. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4020-8265-8_847
[68] Hugo Scurto, Baptiste Caramiaux, and Frédéric Bevilacqua. 2021. Prototyping
machine learning through diffractive art practice. In Designing Interactive Systems
Conference 2021. 2013–2025.
[69] Rob Strong and Bill Gaver. 1996. Feather, Scent, and Shaker: Supporting Simple
Intimacy. In Proceedings of CSCW, Vol. 96. 29–30. https://cfacaa.human.cornell.
edu/dea.arl/linked%20docs/Feather%20Scent%20and%20Shaker.pdf
[70] Jakob Tholander, Maria Normark, and Chiara Rossitto. 2012. Understanding
agency in interaction design materials. In Proceedings of the 2012 ACM annual
conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI '12. ACM Press. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/2207676.2208417
[71] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones,
Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all
you need. In Advances in neural information processing systems. 5998–6008.
[72] Peter-Paul Verbeek. 2005. What things do: Philosophical reflections on technology,
agency, and design. Pennsylvania State University Press, University Park, PA.
[73] Peter-Paul Verbeek. 2015. Beyond Interaction: A Short Introduction to Mediation
Theory. Interactions 22, 3 (apr 2015), 26–31. https://doi.org/10.1145/2751314
[74] Lev S Vygotsky. 1962. Thought and word. (1962).
[75] Ron Wakkary. 2021. Things We Could Design: For More Than Human-Centered
Worlds. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
[76] Ron Wakkary, William Odom, Sabrina Hauser, Garnet Hertz, and Henry Lin.
2015. Material Speculation: Actual Artifacts for Critical Inquiry. Aarhus Series on
Human Centered Computing 1, 1 (Oct. 2015), 12. https://doi.org/10.7146/aahcc.
v1i1.21299
[77] Ron Wakkary, Doenja Oogjes, Sabrina Hauser, Henry Lin, Cheng Cao, Leo Ma,
and Tijs Duel. 2017. Morse Things: A Design Inquiry into the Gap Between
Things and Us. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Designing Interactive
Systems. ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3064663.3064734
[78] Ron Wakkary, Doenja Oogjes, Henry W. J. Lin, and Sabrina Hauser. 2018. Philoso-
phers Living with the Tilting Bowl. Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3173668
[79] Anne Wilson and Michael Ross. 2003. The identity function of autobiographical
memory: Time is on our side. Memory 11, 2 (2003), 137–149.
[80] Shoshana Zuboff. 2018. The Age of Surveillance Capitalism: The Fight for a Human
Future at the New Frontier of Power. Profile Books, London, UK.
