Miracle Machine in the Making:
Soulful Speculation with Kabbalah
Brett A. Halperin
University of Washington, Human
Centered Design & Engineering
Seattle, WA, USA
bhalp@uw.edu
Daniela K. Rosner
University of Washington, Human
Centered Design & Engineering
Seattle, WA, USA
dkrosner@uw.edu
ABSTRACT
What does it mean to design for a miracle—an ineffable phenome-
non that might just exist in the world, but might also transcend it?
Focusing on an esoteric strand of Jewish mystical thought known
as Kabbalah, we draw from speculative interview activities with
11 Jewish creative interlocutors to describe a process of designing
a “miracle machine.” Interweaving foundational Kabbalah litera-
ture with design inquiry, we find that lived experiences of miracles
span life-saving events, effortful acts of love, and ineffable forms of
knowledge. We also learn that people envision miracle machines
as natural, cosmic, and sensory systems with transcendent capaci-
ties. These insights rework a normative focus on the human mind
(cognition) and body (embodiment) by embracing the all-too-often
overlooked soul as a design resource. We end with a reflection on
what soulful speculation entails and the purview that it expands,
reorienting our understanding of what machines are altogether.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Human-centered computing → Interaction design theory,
concepts and paradigms.
KEYWORDS
Contemplation, Divinity, Faith, Judaism, Magic, Meditation, Mind-
fulness, More-than-Human, Mysticism, Non-Human, Religion, Sci-
ence and Religion, Soul, Spirituality, Speculation, Speculative De-
sign, Techno-Mysticism, Transcendence, Transcendent Experiences
ACM Reference Format:
Brett A. Halperin and Daniela K. Rosner. 2023. Miracle Machine in the
Making: Soulful Speculation with Kabbalah. In Designing Interactive Systems
Conference (DIS ’23), July 10–14, 2023, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 17 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3563657.3595990
1
INTRODUCTION
“When it comes to political organizing and climate work,
we need a miracle whether it’s some sort of actual non-
scientifically explained divine intervention in our situa-
tion or really effective community organizing.”
— Danielle, Climate Activist
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
DIS ’23, July 10–14, 2023, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
© 2023 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9893-0/23/07.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3563657.3595990
We live during a period of profound unrest. Whether due to global
pandemics, the existential crises of a warming planet, or the height-
ened awareness of extreme social and political inequity, a strong cur-
rent of unease has taken root in the field of design research. Many of
us who feel the insurmountability of the current challenges—issues
that are hardly solvable at the scale of individual intervention, and
increasingly impossible through structural reform—are searching
for additional responses, as one of our interlocutors observes above.
Some call for organizing and collective action to rework existing
institutional arrangements [41, 53, 121, 139]. Others call for shaping
advocacy around public policy [8, 39, 44, 103]. Such efforts share
ambitious hope for exceeding instrumental change. It is a hope for
something beyond the easy-to-place solution; something more com-
plex than an engineering innovation; something more ethereal than
‘disruption’ or resistance. Alongside day-to-day action, these efforts
highlight a desire for intervention beyond human limitations—a
mystical occurrence that might just transcend pain and suffering.
For design, the notion of mysticism might seem far afield. To
be sure, mysticism has many definitions, some of which refer to
the possibility of acquiring ineffable knowledge attributed to the
divine [42]. Design, by contrast, tends to adhere to the terrestrial—
those decisions made by people creating conditions for change in
the earthly realm. To speak of mystical design then is to either
redefine mysticism as human-made or to consider the work of a
non-human designer. While scholars have begun to explore non-
human [22, 34, 45, 50, 69, 101] and magical design possibilities
[6, 96, 108, 117, 122, 123, 136], designing for mystical phenomena
and transcendent experiences [25, 95] has been less fully imagined.
Our study builds on this loosely connected body of design schol-
arship that explores mystical connections to the unknown. Calling
their projects speculative, critical, or reflective [33, 57, 71, 91], this
range of work has reckoned with the impossibility of recovery or
resolution, turning to religion or secular modes of spirituality (e.g.,
[95, 118, 145])—sometimes tracing connections between them. For
example, AI scholar Mitchell Marcus provocates that computer sci-
entists are in some ways like kabbalist mystics of today in terms of
how they program machines with language, manipulating symbols
to create information structures [94]. Looking to these connections
between design and Kabbalah, we probe the possibility of support-
ing unconstrained speculation around visions for machinery.
Kabbalah refers to a set of texts, scholarly discipline, and school
of Jewish mystical thought that likely hails from thirteenth century
Spain [42]. Unlike exoteric Judaism examined in design research,
which underscores shared rules, laws, and knowledge [67, 152],
Kabbalah is an esoteric method of study that emphasizes secret or
not commonly-held knowledge [21, 42, 59, 79, 125]. According to
DIS ’23, July 10–14, 2023, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Halperin & Rosner
Figure 1: Hand-drawn illustrations of motifs in Kabbalah texts to inspire conceptual designs of miracle machinery.
Kabbalah texts where miracles are narrated by source text authors
and debated among scholars, miracles are extraordinary and desired
events that often go unexplained by nature or science [59, 61, 99].
They surface not only in the central text, the Zohar (“Book of Splen-
dor” or “Radiance”) [59, 61, 99], but also in conversations among
Kabbalah scholars [20, 49] and practitioners, discerning miracles
as rewards for “ethical virtue in the earthly realm” or expressions
of a “particular view of divine providence” [49, p.273,286].
As two Jewish design scholars, we speculate with Kabbalah as
a cultural form of more-than-human inquiry, introspection, and
critique alongside fellow members of our Jewish communities. We
therefore build upon decades of design scholarship that has bene-
fited from studying speculation, as well as non-humans, non-users,
and peripheral contexts (e.g., [13, 15, 120]) to ask: (1) What expe-
riences do people associate with miracles?; and (2) How do people
envision a miracle machine inspired by Kabbalah?
To address these questions, we draw from a speculative inquiry
involving 11 Jewish interlocutors whose creative practices may cre-
ate certain conditions or environments for miraculous experiences
to transpire. Each session unfolded in three parts: an interview
(questions about miracles and related Jewish mystical phenomena);
Kabbalah readings (collaborative close readings and interpretation
of source texts); and meditative sketching (a design activity involv-
ing illustration and analysis of a miracle machine). We devised these
sessions to lay the groundwork for examining the role that design
techniques may play in envisioning new technological formats for
reflecting on and experiencing miracles.
Across this work, we make three contributions to design research
literature. First, we broaden conversations on digital transcendence
(e.g. [25, 28]) to present a form of technological development that
helps designers reinterpret the conventional boundaries among
users and interaction design contexts, use cases, and implicated
non-humans. This process prompts designers to ask participants
about the soul and to grasp forms of wonder, intuition, and aware-
ness that exceed the physical (interpretable, experiential) world.
Second, in the intimate interweaving of Jewish mystical thought
and design, we identify techniques for deepening design inquiry
methods for speculation. We show how incorporating modes of
meditative sketching and mystical study in the design process open
nuanced pathways for self-directed introspection that embraces
and exceeds observed reality—a form of engagement that we deem
participatory “soul work.” Lastly, the resulting design proposals
expand scopes of speculation by considering more sensory possi-
bilities and peripheral users, as well as extended timelines of use
by charting engagements with non-humans (other species, sacred
objects, ancestors, decedents, and divinity). Through attentive en-
counters with beliefs surrounding the soul, our inquiry prompts
design scholars to exercise care amid temporal ecologies that frame
interaction as a wider set of design horizons in speculative activities.
Miracle Machine in the Making: Soulful Speculation with Kabbalah
DIS ’23, July 10–14, 2023, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
2
BACKGROUND AND LITERATURE REVIEW
While a thorough review of prior work is beyond the scope of our
article, below we cover key questions and themes that shaped our
analysis across Jewish mysticism, technology for transcendence,
and speculative design inquiry. One important aspect of this work
involves recognition that terms such as mysticism, magic, and mir-
acles are neither clear-cut nor stable, but tend to highlight common
concepts such as connectedness, timelessness, and knowledge in
relation to transcendence [29]. Mystical experiences—operationally
defined as the deepest form of transcendence [28] and described as
“peak-experience[s]” [25, 88, 97]—often exhibit a core set of features
(e.g., sense of oneness or unity), whether viewed as religious or
not [25, 107, 134]. Meanwhile, magic can be understood as either
sorcery or natural phenomena [43]. Our focus is on how the latter
“opens onto us the properties and qualities of hidden things, and the
knowledge of the whole course of Nature” [Ibid]—secret workings
that link the natural world to the divine [115, p.18]. As for miracles,
in this paper, they refer to transcendent experiences, which may
be perceived as mystical or magical across religions and cultures.
To follow, we focus on miracles vis-à-vis Jewish mystical thought.
2.1
Kabbalah and Jewish Mystical Thought: A
Brief Overview
Our work primarily engages excerpts from two Kabbalah source
texts, Sefer Ha Bahir (“Book of Illumination” or “Brightness”) and
Sefer Ha Zohar (“Book of Radiance” or “Splendor”)—two classical
works of Kabbalah originally written primarily in Aramaic. First
published as early as 1176, the Bahir expounds biblical verses with
secret wisdom of divinity, creation, and Hebrew letters, unveiling
the Ten Sefirot [divine attributes of God] that form the foundation
of the kabbalistic belief system, the Tree of Life. Once the Zohar sur-
faced toward the end of the thirteenth century, it became the most
influential text among the body of medieval Kabbalah literature [79]
as a type of midrash (rabbinic interpretation of the Jewish Bible)
that is also part medieval fiction. Among the many translations of
these works, we draw mostly on Daniel Matt’s acclaimed annotated
and explained Zohar [99], as well as on a version of the Bahir that is
attributed to Rabbi Nehunia ben haKana of the first century esoteric
school (and translated into English by Aryeh Kaplan) [79].
Despite variation in interpretations, scholars point to mysti-
cism as a common denominator of Kabbalah. German-born Israeli
philosopher and historian Gershom Scholem is credited with found-
ing the modern academic study of Kabbalah as Jewish mystical
thought [1, 7, 124–127, 132]. Centered on the Zohar [59], Scholem
focused on philology and historicism, while refraining from ethno-
graphic research on contemporary kabbalists or occultist Kabbalah
in practice [74, 75]. In line with Scholem’s academic study, we per-
form this work not as kabbalist mystics, but rather as scholars of the
tradition. However, as design scholars, we are also interested in how
kabbalists manipulate symbols and language to create information
systems like computer programmers [94] in their mystical practices
such as those of medieval Spanish kabbalists who, Schwartz argues,
developed NLP in effect [114]. We further note that what people
consider “authentic” Kabbalah is a source of debate since its esoter-
cisim can be exploited [73]. The international nonprofit Kabbalah
Centre [14], for example, has their own translations that deviate
from academic scholarship with much controversy surrounding it
[54]. With that said, we recognize the knowledge of both Kabbalah
scholars and practitioners. Thus, our study foregrounds the aca-
demic study, while also conversing with contemporary kabbalists
(as other scholars have [99, 146]). Academic and practical studies
may deviate in nature, but both tend to revolve around the Zohar.
The Zohar is commentary on the Torah (the Five Books of Moses),
but also an experiment in fiction [99]. The mystical text follows an
intricate literary structure of radical poetic mythology [21], inter-
weaving homilies and parables of traveling companions unearthing
mystical secrets. In the Zohar, God is presented not as static, but
rather as in a dynamic process and cause-and-effect relationship
with humanity. This means that human actions affect God’s whole-
ness. Divine union of God’s fragmented androgynous body can
only occur if humans act virtuously to express the divine potential
in them and thus in God [99]. Given this dynamic, every interaction
in the text is “supernatural.” However, the authors, namely Spanish
rabbi and kabbalist Moses de León [42], reserve the word “miracle”
itself for not the most spectacular events, but rather the more mi-
nor ones for which the divine interventions could be overlooked
(e.g., the growth of a fruit tree in a cave to nourish a protagonist).
Given this subtlety, renown medieval kabbalist Nahmanides posits
the notion of “hidden miracles” that are both ubiquitous and hid-
den in our everyday environment [20, Nahmanides, Torat Adonai
Temimah, 1: 147]. In analyzing literary devices and themes such as
miracles, many contemporary Kabbalah scholars have conducted
close-readings of the mystical thought and motifs in source texts.
Below we draw from this form of close analysis connected to mira-
cles, bringing age-old Kabbalah literature into our design process.
2.2
Transcendence, Mysticism, and Judaism in
Design Research
Design scholars have increasingly studied techno-transcendence
[25, 29, 100, 104] through inquiries that complicate normative no-
tions of interaction between users and technologies, often involving
non-humans in sacred experiences. In their landmark text on the
subject, Blythe and Buie [25] present a fertile field of transcendent
experience (TX) design to consider states of consciousness that op-
erate beyond the limits of an individual identity, or what they call (in
line with neuropsychology literature [109]) the transpersonal [25,
p.22]. Designing for transcendent experiences—connecting with
something transpersonal—then hinges on accounting for not only
individuals, but also their sources of connection [104]. Scholars
across cultural anthropology and psychology have found that peo-
ple often associate transcendence with emotions like awe, wonder,
gratitude, and appreciation [78, 109, 116, 128], which design schol-
ars have explored in techno-spiritual design [24, 25, 29], as well as
user experience design for mindfulness [47, 89] and awe [35, 36].
The relationship between mysticism and design reflects a long-
standing dilemma in technology. Where computational practices
tend to emphasize the new and realizable, mystical practices tend
to underscore the age-old and the unknown [16, 67, 91, 105]. A
small but significant body of scholarship has explored the occult in
the landscape of digital design, outlining opportunities for support-
ing faith-based practices [151] and moments of caution and repair
[3, 58]. In these connections, design researchers have alchemized
DIS ’23, July 10–14, 2023, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Halperin & Rosner
scientific and mystical ways of knowing. For example, Seymour and
Van Kleek engage Japanese Shinto conceptions of the soul to inform
the design of social robots, interrogating assumptions underpinning
the design of voice assistants [129]. To date, these kinds of mystical
inquiries have uncovered a range of implications for technology,
including the entanglement of religious and technoscience practice
[3, 152, 154]; support for moments of meditation and contempla-
tion [76, 119, 133, 144, 145]; the importance of tending to intimate
nuances of spiritual inquiry across cultures [57, 92, 110, 111, 155];
and the role that artifacts play in techno-spiritual experiences and
practices [18, 23, 27–29, 70].
Adjacent design research on Judaism has drawn on theological
traditions to challenge what scholars perceive to be the hegemony,
amorality, and soullessness of mainstream technological develop-
ment. Recent scholarship, for instance, has shown how Judaism and
technology can enhance one another by positioning Judaic practices
and concepts as exemplars for design innovation [67]. For example,
in a study of American Jewish Orthodox families, Woodruff and col-
leagues show that a mixture of technology and religion in home au-
tomation can support the soulful Jewish tradition of refraining from
technology use on the Sabbath [152]. Taking this insight to social
justice, Hammer argues that Judaic orientations can resist Christian
hegemony in systems design more broadly [67]. Putting this theory
into practice, Klein and Dubin describe a socially-distanced robotic
menorah that they designed amid the Covid-19 pandemic to help
safely bring families together to celebrate Hanukkah, the Jewish
holiday of miracles [82]. Our work draws from this focus on Ju-
daic notions of miracles and experiments in design to explore how
technology can serve not as a problem solving vehicle, but rather
as a reflection of spiritual encounters—communal candle lighting,
singing prayers, and celebrating miracles. While this set of projects
exhibits a variety of ways technology might serve Jewish practices,
they only begin to scratch the surface of what a computational sys-
tem inflected with mysticism might do. We take inspiration from
these theoretical, practical, and interstitial works to investigate the
unknown mystical potential of Jewish miracle machinery.
2.3
Critical, Playful, and Magical Speculation
Many design scholars have engaged critical, playful, and even
magical forms of speculation in the here and now, as well as in
envisioning more just futures. Tan and colleagues, for instance,
present critical-playful speculation as a method for enacting partic-
ipants’ creative imaginations on one hand, while eliciting critiques
grounded in their social realities on the other [62]. Taking a similar
approach to design inquiry, Fox and colleagues develop a fictional
catalog of speculative artifacts that engage emotional, social, and
political implications to consider possible design futures [52]. Ad-
ditionally, Sum and colleagues evoke “dreaming” as a frame for
envisioning futures of disability justice that transcend hegemonic
thought [137]. Meanwhile, numerous scholars use similarly reflex-
ive methods for critically rethinking time in relation to the future,
calling for greater attention paid to: how temporal representations
are culturally situated [83]; how deeper reflection on connections
to time can actualize anti-oppressive futures [31, 32, 66]; and how
spiritual transformations can occur over time with respect to love,
friendship, and kinship [130]. To facilitate such vulnerable futuring,
Howell and colleagues have called on design researchers to embrace
uncertainties about the future by having humble respect for all that
which is unknown [71]. Such speculation can inform design today.
Some scholars have also studied how magic can play a role in
media arts and design [72, 96, 108, 117, 122, 123, 136]. As Pierson de-
scribes in tracing the development of computer-generated-imagery
(CGI) back to early practices of magicians, visual effects in the cine-
matic arts are “designed to trick the eye and stimulate the imagina-
tion” while presented to audiences as magic; in her words: “artists,
designers, and engineers [...] are revered as wizards and illusionists”
in terms of how they elicit wonder [115, p.12]. Demonstrating this
in design research, To and colleagues have maneuvered uncertainty
and curiosity as speculative design resources [140]—for example,
“Treehouse Dreams” presents a method for eliciting interview data
by inviting participants to envision a fantasy tree house: a dream
space that renders a “magic circle” [72] for “meaning-making and
open communication of thoughts and feelings” [142]. Similarly,
Nam and Oldenburg create an immersive wonderland experience
for people to find the magic in the mundane through stories [108].
Sharing this playful technique, Andersen and colleagues’ magic
machine workshops take an anti-solutionist approach to “inject the
notions of the powerful and unknown” into subject matters that
may otherwise be too banal or difficult for design briefs to address
[4–6]. Magical speculation thus expands imaginative capacities.
While magic may seem to hinge on fantasy and fiction, Carey
and colleagues show how a “fictional foundation” that is not merely
speculative can also make it less burdensome for people to share
personal stories of intense experiences that look toward just futures
[33, 141]. Since telling personal stories of miracles can also be inti-
mate, vulnerable, and even derided by skeptics, we take inspiration
from these works to think about how speculation can not only be
fantastical, but also reflexive and grounded in reality by provid-
ing a storytelling foundation for sharing desired futures and past
experiences of miracles that may be discounted in other settings.
2.4
Non-Human and Peripheral Users
As an additional focus, we engage prior work on non-human and
peripheral users seldom recognized in design processes [13, 15,
51, 120]. In techno-spiritual endeavors in particular, we learn that
“users” may also be thought of as sacred imagery [153] and non-
human cosmic entities such as divinity [17, 24, 57]. Non-human
entities may be as immersive as a mosque or landscape [153]; as
simple yet nourishing as an apple that grows from a tree [143];
as protective and vital as a home; or as mundane yet restorative
as hand-cream [80]. All together, these non-humans demonstrate
the power of inanimate artifacts to open pathways for reimagining
not only who or what gets considered in design processes, but also
the normative lifespan of use [55, 56, 156]. For example, Massimi
and Charise develop thanatosensitive design to consider mortality
and death in systems for memorializing ancestors [98]. Others
have also explored technology to commemorate lost lives [135] and
deceased relatives in techno-spiritual interactions [27]—sometimes
even accounting for ghosts, spirits, and other unseen forces [30].
These works thus expand the definition and lifespan of the “user.”
Miracle Machine in the Making: Soulful Speculation with Kabbalah
DIS ’23, July 10–14, 2023, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Engaging “traditionally ignored” users [51] further extends to
feminist and anticolonial thought around more-than-human de-
sign. Scholars have cautioned against efforts to “humanize” or “see
through the eyes of an other (human or non-human)” rather than
meet them “where they are” with “nonrepresentational ways of
knowing” [80] beyond colonial mentalities [138]. These works draw
from Black and Indigenous ecological scholarship [112, 113, 149] to
emphasize the importance of multi-species environmental design
[22, 34, 45, 50, 69, 101]—sometimes describing pitfalls of oppressive
subject-object divides that evoke domination over nature [138].
For example, Key and colleagues draw on the work of Watts, a
Haudenosaunee and Anishinaabe scholar, [149] to warn against
framing non-humans as subjects for extraction [80]. Similarly, Es-
cobar calls for reorienting design away from colonial exploitation
[26, 48]. These arguments reappear in work by Livio and Devendorf,
who suggest subverting non-human instrumentalization to foster
reciprocal relations at the “eco-technical interface” [90]. Our work
builds on these proposals by probing the role that natural objects
and other non-humans deemed sacred in Jewish mysticism might
play in particular formulations of interaction and use.
3
METHODOLOGY
To facilitate reflection and speculation around miracles, we de-
signed our study to include interviewing, close readings, and sketch-
ing prompts in the tradition of integrative mixed methods inquiry
[9, 10]. We planned these activities with two aims: (1) to present
interlocutors with Kabbalah concepts and motifs (e.g., Fig 1); and
(2) to help design scholars imagine new relationships between tech-
nology and mystical consciousness. As we reflect on later (in 5.1),
we find that the fusion of meditative music, sketching, and mystical
study offers a unique opening for inquiry and introspection.
3.1
Study Design
We held remote, one-hour study sessions with 11 Jewish creative
interlocutors (ages 26 to 75). To safely navigate the Covid-19 pan-
demic and reach broad locations, we conducted all interviews via
Zoom with video cameras on (except for two sessions that were
mostly audio only). With interlocutors’ consent, Zoom recorded
audio and video. Each interlocutor participated in a separate ses-
sion. Ten sessions were one-on-one interviews, and one consisted
of two interviewers (researchers) with one interviewee. All data
were collected solely from these sessions aside from a few points
of clarification in follow-up conversations with some interlocutors.
In preparation for interview study sessions, both authors per-
formed close readings [9, 10] of Kabbalah texts [49, 99]. For us,
this involved making annotations and writing memos, followed by
discussion of our interpretations during weekly meetings. These
discussions led to deepened analysis of central themes and curation
of poems and stories (from [49, 99]) to incorporate in the study
sessions. We paid close attention to literary motifs by tracking,
curating, and illustrating them (Fig 1). Ahead of the interviews, we
shared curated excerpts from the Zohar [99] with our interlocutors
as an optional reading exercise to orient those less familiar with
Kabbalah. We also aimed to introduce interlocutors to critical exe-
gesis that could potentially deepen their speculations about miracle
machinery during the study session.
Each study session broke into five main phases: (1) background
questions; (2) mystical text interaction and discussion; (3) story-
telling about miracles; (4) design activity; and (5) reflection. During
phase one, we asked questions about their creative, social, and/or
mystical practices. For phase two, we asked them to react to the
kabbalistic belief system presented in the Bahir [79] for which we
provided a brief overview and diagram. We also summarized how
miracles appear in Kabbalah and asked them to reflect on poems or
stories that stood out to them. In phase three, we prompted them
to share specific times that they experienced miracles and any fu-
ture miracles desired. During phase four, we used a design exercise
to explore connections among our conversations on miracles, the
Kabbalah excerpts, and speculative technology. We first asked our
interlocutors to describe what they envision a “miracle machine”
as. Then, we asked each interlocutor to draw a conceptual sketch of
one vision for a miracle machine. To facilitate this, we shared our
screen to display mystical motifs for prompting creative inspiration
(e.g., Fig 1). To sensitize them to the motifs and design exercise, we
played out loud Ovadia Hamama’s rendition of the Ana Bekoach,
often considered one of the most powerful prayers in Kabbalah [68].
We told them that they had until the end of the five-minute song to
finish sketching. This time-constraint modeled that of a five-minute
guided meditation, a short-form that can be just enough time to
offer benefits such as mindfulness [40, 86]. We clarified that this
embodied form of concept sketching was meant to be loose, lax,
and intuitive rather than tight, rigid, and calculated. Once the song
ended, we asked them to share their sketches and probed design
rationale. We ended with a reflection on participating in the study.
3.2
Recruitment
To reflect emergent insights from phase one, we recruited close
contacts who we knew thought about miracles and were engaged
in kabbalistic themes (e.g., tikkun olam, the modern Jewish notion
of social justice and action derived from Kabbalah; light or lighting;
art or design with spiritual orientations). Everyone identified as
Jewish. Most participants also had a transcendent practice, meaning
that their professions had relevancy to physical contexts that are
common for transcendent experiences: architecture, art, music, and
natural environments including outer space [25]. We purposely
invited people varying in familiarity with Kabbalah and outside
technology fields to explore alternative ideas of Kabbalah-inspired
computational systems. All participants were based in a US city ex-
cept for one located in Tzfat, the center of the Kabbalah movement.
3.3
Analyses
After the sessions, we closely read and analyzed the data, individ-
ually and as a pair. Each transcript was approximately 25 pages,
totaling to about 275 pages, which we reviewed in full at least four
times. In our first round of reading, we watched each recorded
session and adjusted the audio transcript generated from Zoom to
accurately reflect the discussion and activity. Then, we conducted
additional rounds of shared analysis to draw out analytic inter-
pretations, questions, and connections inspired by Adele Clarke’s
situated mapping techniques [38]. This work involved in depth
engagement with individual stories, sharing and revising interpre-
tations in memos, as well as identifying sensitizing concepts to
DIS ’23, July 10–14, 2023, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Halperin & Rosner
reflect on and revise in subsequent rounds of analysis. Furthermore,
in the tradition of close reading [12], we analyzed individual re-
sponses for literary elements such as diction, figurative language,
and metaphors entangled with their emotional responses and em-
bodied encounters [11, 87] with miracles. This approach allowed
us to examine their lived experiences as told through stories, while
also reflect on our roles and relationships to the activities [77].
4
FINDINGS
Our intention was to learn about specific experiences with miracles
and to explore what relationship they might have to technology.
Across the stories of miracles and miracle machines that follow, our
interlocutors speak to more-than-human interactions with other
people, species, and cosmic entities. We find near-death moments
intercepted by deer and divine presences; exceptional trials of child-
birth; and healing through dialogue with God. These conversations
with miracles and Kabbalah texts bring new readings of technology
to the forefront. They also stress the significance of interpreting
technology as part of expanded ecological connections, empha-
sizing the role that sensory encounters and non-humans play in
reorienting people’s minds, bodies, and souls to not only interac-
tions with machinery, but also the universe writ large.
4.1
What Experiences Do People Associate With
Miracles?
During the first part of our study sessions, our interlocutors re-
flected on their experiences of miracles, relaying moments of awe
and relief. Rather than asking interlocutors to define miracles, we
invited them to share stories about their specific experiences of
them. Our goal was less to characterize miracles definitively or to
delineate what they are or are not, and more to open up different
orientations toward their existence, meaning, and potential. We
expected all of our interlocutors to have already encountered mira-
cles in some form based on how they described their practices and
interests during our recruitment phase. In practice, however, some
encounters took unexpected turns, including when one person ini-
tially resisted the premise. Despite varied responses, each person
used their readings of the Kabbalah texts to explore what kind of
phenomena a miracle might be. They interchangeably spoke of
miracles as near-death events, effortful acts of love, and forms of
knowledge beyond words. While interlocutors had different ideas
and stories, they all elucidated the indispensable role that non-
humans play in experiences of miracles, which we find hinge on
mystical connections with deceased ancestors, forthcoming babies,
God, biodiverse life forms, and nature.
4.1.1
Miracles as Life-Saving Events. Multiple interlocutors asso-
ciated miracles with senses of divine intervention connected to
overcoming near-death encounters of illness or pain. For exam-
ple, Erin shared a story about a life-saving childhood moment that
seemed divinely orchestrated. On a canoe trip with their dad and his
brother, they inadvertently entered whitewater, stretches of river
water that run dangerously fast. Their canoe filled up with water,
pushing them perilously close to the river. At one point, Erin’s leg
got stuck in between the canoe and a rock, a painful experience
that they believed would cause them to lose their leg:
It felt like it was going to squeeze my leg off and
the weirdest thing—I saw this thing out of the
corner of my eye, and it was this deer standing
on the side of the river. And I think in turning my
head, I pivoted my body and got free and kind of
made my way to the riverbank and might have
passed out. But when I woke up, the deer was
still there. So it felt like [...] this miracle of sorts.
[...] there’s something in that particular moment
that felt like some connection to the cosmos or
God or something beyond the human realm that
intervened and communicated and to me, in that
moment, felt like it saved my life.
The deer standing next to Erin, as they managed to maneuver safely
to land, represented a particular presence. The miraculous act was
not limited to the animal’s concern for near death—it required the
animal’s role in witnessing Erin’s threat and survival. While in
excruciating pain, Erin described shifting their body to look at the
deer, dislodging their leg, and making it to the riverbank. Describing
that moment as a miracle, they drew a connection between the phe-
nomenal recovery of life and divine intervention. With this soulful
connection, Erin articulates the vital roles that a deer and divinity
played in their near-death experience of a life-saving miracle.
This soulful connection to the cosmos, relating to phenomena be-
yond the human realm, undergirds a sense of awe that several inter-
locutors described in overcoming mortal threats. Further speaking
to survival, Alana shared a story of her baby surviving a near-death
experience in the womb. She described herself as being “not of
the age to really get anything that needed to be checked out by an
ultrasound,” but her spouse had uncanny insight. Her husband, a
radiologist with a curious interest in utero-ultrasounds, told her
that he had seen some bad cases at work and that she should do an
ultrasound, just in case. When Alana received the ultrasound, her
husband was very concerned. Ultimately, Alana delivered early to
save her son’s life. She reflected on the experience as follows: “It’s
a miracle that [my son] is here because he would not have made it.
One kidney was gone in utero and the other one was being insulted
[...]. If his father was not interested in this type of work [...] I’d have a
whole different story to tell [...]. This kid never would have been born.”
With this reflection, Alana conveys a rescue, which seemed beyond
belief. In turn, she felt the unreal weight of this seemingly divine
intervention, interpreting its unfolding as “the biggest miracle” of
her life, as well as the source of her son’s life.
For these interlocutors, a miracle did not signify a solitary, static,
or isolated phenomenon, but rather an event activated by a form of
mystical connection, presence, and timing. Betsy further spoke to
this when she told a story about how her breast cancer was curiously
caught just in time to be cured. These miracles involved stakes that
were both particular and consequential. Whether surviving the
loss of a leg, life, or child, they hinged on a cataclysmic possibility.
Transcending fatality or loss seemed to be attributable to miraculous
involvement of other life forms, loved ones, and divinity.
4.1.2
Miracles as Effortful Acts of Love. Some interlocutors shared
stories of experiencing miracles through their own effortful acts
of love: processes that took intention, time, and work to cultivate.
With ongoing care, their benevolent giving could blossom into a
Miracle Machine in the Making: Soulful Speculation with Kabbalah
DIS ’23, July 10–14, 2023, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
child, self-transformation, or relief and healing. Describing this care
as a righteous phenomenon, Avraham explained: “Once we reach a
state of pure giving—a state loving that which is outside of ourselves—
then we will be able to experience all of the boundless goodness.” But,
he clarified, such “goodness” cannot and will not be received “to
serve ourselves.” Instead, it can only be received in “a state of divine
service, a state of giving and love.” Other interlocutors emphasized
this effortful giving across stories of willful and arduous care work,
leading to receipt of divine blessings. Consider Tamara, who joined
the session with her newborn baby, sharing her “unreal” experience
of giving birth to him and receiving the gift that is her son in return:
The birth of the child coming out is probably
the closest thing to the word miracle I’d say be-
cause it’s unreal. [...] I gave birth to both children
unmedicated and him unassisted really, which
allows you to feel every moment and everything
[...]. It’s just actually pulling him out and taking
him into my arms that feels like an absolute like
‘holy s—, a human being just emerged out of me.’
[...] definitely a miracle.
Tamara associates miracles with not just receiving her beloved baby,
but also the act of giving birth itself: bringing him to life without
the assistance of medicine or any technological “beeps” at home. In
giving labor her full attention, she noticed an “unreal” sensibility
coming from her choice to feel every moment of childbirth followed
by her ongoing work to care for and sustain the miracle of life that
she received. These laborious acts of love reflect how miracles can
be born out of something or someone yet to be born who ultimately
extends and indeed transforms the self in the process.
Rachel spoke in similar terms about a miraculous self-transformation
from effortful acts of self-love with God’s help. After repeated phone
calls to a renown psychic in New York City, she finally convinced
him to teach her how to perform tarot card readings. That persis-
tence led her to transformational healing and thus her life changing:
What I had found in the tarot [...] part of that
deck is composed of 22 cards [...] related to the 22
letters of the Hebrew alphabet, which the tarot
says are the archetypes of the universe and so
does Kabbalah [...]. That was really a miracle
because when I started studying Kabbalah my
whole life started opening up. [...] I was on an-
tidepressants at the time. I remember that I was
on medication for so long. That all lifted. Sud-
denly, I felt like I didn’t need it. I was doing well
without all this because, again, tapping into these
three letter combinations and doing the prayers.
I did the Dialing God[: Technology for the Soul]
book [...]. When you transform yourself, miracles
occur because you’re transforming your nature.
Rachel associates miracles with the soul work that she did to trans-
form her conscious nature through “dialing God,” a daily process of
kabbalistic prayer and meditation (e.g, the Ana Bekoach) [19]. By
framing this process as “technology for the soul” in the book she
engaged by sullied former Kabbalah Centre director Yehuda Berg,
she links the cultivation of self-transformation and design. Upon
materializing soulful connections with God, her life “opened up”
with Kabbalah, shepherding a successful line of kabbalistic jewelry
including her “One Love” necklace to spread the message: “Love
thy neighbor as thyself.” Through this story of miraculous change,
she connected persistent giving of love to the receipt of divine
blessings—what Betsy called “unimaginably hard work” contingent
upon “self-love” in addition to selfless love; as Betsy, explained “I
had [my son], so I had to heal.” For these interlocutors implausible
gifts emerge from a care ethic and labor of love that makes miracles.
4.1.3
Miracles as Ineffable Knowledge. While most interlocutors
shared stories of miraculous experiences, two were reluctant to
narrate any single event. Instead, they spoke to their reluctance,
offering explanations that were logically similar, yet ideologically
contrasting; they reflected the unexpected connections between
their respective fields of deep study in Kabbalah and theoretical
physics. As we learned, both fields involve contemplating the mirac-
ulous nature of the universe upon connections within and beyond
the solar system, including with non-human life forms, celestial
beings, and cosmic entities like the sun and stars.
Avraham, a mystical artist working with Kabbalah concepts in
Tzfat, attested to why and how everything is a miracle that cannot
be reduced to a single instance. In articulating why the universe is
miraculous, he spoke to its composition:
Because right now we are on a big ball of dirt
that is floating through space. There is the sun
[...] that is blowing up every single moment. We
are just the right distance, at just the right tilt, at
just the right spin [...]. Space is so big [...]. Our
hearts have been beating since the moment that
we have been born. We can see stars. There are
birds [...]. It is just glorious! Straight out glorious!
In this explanation, Avraham associates miracles not only with the
creation of the universe and Earth with its sun, stars, birds, and
people, but also the moments of appreciation for glory that may
otherwise be overlooked. When he stops to recognize that existence
is miraculous, “every second is a straight out 100% full blast miracle.”
Astrophysicist Bob, by contrast, relayed skepticism that anything
at all could be a miracle. When asked to share a specific time that he
experienced a miracle, he surprised us by saying, “Well, there you’re
going to be out of luck, a little bit, because I don’t believe in miracles
[...]. There are things that happen that are not easy to explain.” Given
our discussion of miracles in the study recruitment, we expected
Bob to talk about miracles. Although he expressed disbelief in mir-
acles at first, he did allude to the miraculous nature of the universe
that in some ways was similar to Avraham’s conception. Bob said:
It is remarkable that mathematics is the language
of the universe. It’s astonishing, right? [...] why
would the universe care [...] that we can actu-
ally explain things [...] through equations? It’s
amazing actually, isn’t it? [...] there is a kind of
organizing principle [...]. If you want to call it
God or something like that, fine [...]. This person-
organizing principle exists [...]. It’s amazing.
For Bob, the capacity for certain principles to explain space and time,
whether known or unknown, is neither trivial nor expected, but
rather an “astonishing” form of knowledge. Since he was reluctant
DIS ’23, July 10–14, 2023, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Halperin & Rosner
to call this an outright miracle, however, we invited him to explore
this concept further by recounting his family’s survival through the
Holocaust. He then conveyed a similar sense of awe in not only his
own existence, but also that of his daughter: “The fact that I exist,
that [my daughter] exists, is the consequence of a series of chances.
My father met [my] mom [...] in a displaced person camp in Austria in
1946. It’s a miracle.” In essentially calculating his unlikely existence
and the creation of the universe, he computed a miracle within
his mathematical framework. Despite insisting on explanation and
resisting belief in miracles, Bob ultimately embraced ineffability
surrounding himself, his loved ones, and his deceased ancestors.
While Avraham and Bob began their reflections with opposite
perspectives, they both found the miraculous in the cosmos and in
existence. Where Avraham reiterated his stance that miracles are
everything at every second, Bob began by expressing apprehension.
Yet these contradictory understandings of miracles (everything ver-
sus nothing) allowed them to converge on the knowledge that the
composition of the universe and creation of life is miraculous—or at
the very least, “remarkable,” “astonishing,” and “amazing” in Bob’s
words. Such sentiments associate miracles with unlikely events that
defy the odds beyond belief, a process Tamara called “the sublime”
and “that feeling of smallness within something so much greater.”
Betsy also seemed to capture this observation, saying of miracles:
“They are awe-inspiring. It’s everything. It’s how I want to live [...] little
miracle to big miracle to little miracle to big miracle.” Notwithstand-
ing differences in interpretation, interlocutors associated miracles
with an inexplicable and humbling sense of cosmic knowledge.
Altogether our interlocutors’ stories illustrate how miracles offer
a different way of approaching design compared with mainstream
technology development. Seeking out alternative possibilities in
acts of recovery, loving acts, and out-of-this-world knowledge, they
show how devising change (material, social, epistemic) is only pos-
sible through mystical connections with humans and non-humans.
Recall Alana, Bob, and Tamara’s concerns for deceased souls, as
well as Alana and Tamara’s concerns for babies emerging in the
world. These forms of care were not generic or incidental. They af-
firmed a deliberate ethic of love. Below we consider what this focus
on effortful relationality brings to the design of miracle machinery.
4.2
How Do People Envision a Miracle Machine
Inspired by Kabbalah?
In this second part of our study sessions, our interlocutors shifted
from conversation to embodied speculative design activities. Some
initially approached the prompt of a miracle machine in jest, refer-
ring to it variously as a “parody” (Rebecca) and “play thing” (Betsy).
Or Erin saying “miracles don’t happen in machines,” but also express-
ing desire to think beyond what they described as their “dystopic,
machines-are-going-to-do-anything-but-create-a-miracle mentality.”
After studying the Kabbalah texts, however, interlocutors soon
expressed more complex hopes and uncertainties about machinery.
As we see in the sketches that follow, this tenuous relationship
between miracles and machines prompted interlocutors to refig-
ure technology. Their initial feelings of skepticism and uncertainty
transformed into hope, prompting considerations of what machines
are today and speculating around what they may become. Below
we review miracle machine concepts that take an array of formats
and trajectories: natural (in some cases, supernatural) systems for
fostering the sublime; tools for contemplating cosmic systems; and
sensory systems for ascending the body. While some interlocutors
conceived of machines that already exist in their environments, oth-
ers invited more-than-human encounters with God, sacred Jewish
objects, and other life forms in nature. We find that something like
a tree can hold every mighty potential of a miracle (life, love, and
knowledge), broadening our ideas of what machines are altogether.
4.2.1
(Super)Natural Systems. When faced with the kabbalistic be-
lief system that is the Ten Sefirot—the Tree of Life—our interlocutors
reflected on the divine attributes of God such as beauty, eternity,
compassion, power, knowledge, and more. Taking this appreciation
for the Tree of Life to the design of a miracle machine, several
interlocutors envisioned similar phenomena in natural networks.
Consider how Tamara, who previously described a miracle as an
“experience of the sublime,” presented her miracle machine:
It’s literally a tree [...] all the way to the roots
[...] grounding it [...] and sucking nutrients in
from the Earth. [...] If you are the human being
below the tree [...] you will experience the com-
pletely phenomenal and unexpected outcome of
[sunlight] filtration. [...] that is why that grand
tree represents the ultimate miracle machine [...].
The machine is [...] the components of the tree.
[...] a super branch, and then the small branches
begin to grow off of it [...]. It’s like a mechanism
for filtration [...]. Like the computer [...] it has a
function it is doing for me. But it also has running
functions I can’t see that are keeping it alive [...].
So it’s like the background and the foreground.
Tamara is describing not only a tree inspired by the kabbalistic
motif, but also an entire root structure. She tells us that roots are
essential for giving people the experience of being under the tree,
but that people do not experience the roots directly. Instead, what
people experience—sunlight filtration—comes out through its suste-
nance of the tree canopy that people encounter from below. Calling
this process a machine and comparing filtration to computing, she
alludes to how technologies have a front-end and a back-end, but
in a mystical sense. While the “foreground” refers to the observable
aspects of the machine, the “background” refers to unobservable as-
pects that we know exist nonetheless. Tamara illuminates an under-
examined technological capacity: the latent potential for spiritual
connection in the background of computation. This machine—a tree
in and of itself—thus refigures technology with kabbalistic roots. In
the Zohar, the sheltering tree is a celebrated site of mystical study.
When protagonists come across it, they stop to applaud the loveli-
ness of its shade and beauty with prayers [49, p.164]. As the Zohar
implies that this natural site is sanctified with mystical creativity
[49], Tamara suggests that its sublime nature is technological.
Erin expressed a similar sensibility with their sketch, heightening
natural networks to a supernatural level with extraordinary powers:
This little mushroom with the mycelial network
and these little spores [...] have these powers of
bioremediation [...]. They can help transform
toxic chemicals into bioavailable, better organic
Miracle Machine in the Making: Soulful Speculation with Kabbalah
DIS ’23, July 10–14, 2023, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Figure 2: Gallery view of miracle machine sketches inspired by Kabbalah.
compounds that can decompose [...]. It kind of
connects life and death [...] in a lot of biblical and
also ancient stories [...]. So [the miracle machine
is] this spore drive [...] that would connect the
spores from the mushrooms, but also the mycelial
network to engender new plant growth and re-
new our ecosystem [...]. The spores would help
transform people’s consciousnesses to be more
compassionate and connected to the Earth.
Inspired by tikkun olam (‘repair of the world’) and nature motifs,
Erin is depicting a mycelial network of delicate white filaments
within a fungus, entwining fungal roots, business supply chains,
and wide forms of social and political life. Like Tamara’s framework
of branches and roots, Erin’s mycelial network exhibits phenome-
nal capabilities related to the expanded connection, decomposition,
and recomposition of life on Earth for eternity. Placing this insight
into its biblical context, Erin draws attention to the forms of re-
newal and remediation that have long permeated religious stories.
In this spiritual relation, Erin casts the fungal ecosystem as their
miracle machine, using the technological metaphor as a means of
expanding fungal capacities for care and planetary connection by
disseminating compassion into businesses and government to re-
pair the world. In the Bahir [79], tikkun olam appears in a story of
creation, whereby primordial “vessels” (the Ten Sefirot) were able
to receive God’s light, but not interact, give, or hold it. The vessels
were thus overwhelmed by the light and “shattered” (a concept
known as the “Breaking of Vessels”), falling to a lower spiritual
plane and becoming the source of evil [Ibid]. Rooted in this concept,
Erin frames technology as a supernatural mechanism for repairing
these “vessels” by reuniting human activity, divinity, and nature.
DIS ’23, July 10–14, 2023, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Halperin & Rosner
Where Erin and Tamara focused on a particular node in the
network (tree and mushroom), Alana took in the whole. As a garden
designer herself, Alana drew inspiration from the sacred garden
motif to conceptualize the miracle machine as a soul-stirring site
of natural beauty, describing a landscape both new and familiar for
intimate connection with nature:
I have this tree that extends way beyond us into
the sky and then the clouds as they move through
and the world gets dark and then it gets light [...].
A gorgeous beautiful sky just sweeping across
with all the colors of the world. To me that’s just
miracles. [...] this machine should have beauty
to it that just fills up somebody that they cannot
think anything but pure good thoughts [...] and
fills our souls up.
Alana is describing a sunny park that is full of biodiversity: a vibrant
garden of flowers, butterflies, birds, and a “majestic tree,” mediating
light from the multicolor sky. The park as a machine does not serve
a physical or cognitive aim, but rather a soulful purpose. The beauty
radiating from this ecosystem “fills our souls up” with ascendant
feelings of relaxation and aesthetic joy. By focusing on the sensory
power of connecting with nature, the machine stirs the soul.
Unlike Tamara and Erin, however, Alana shifted her vision when
probed as to what makes her concept machine-like. Realizing that
she already had a beautiful urban park near her home, she referred
to her mobility scooter as the miracle machine that gives her access
to the park and to feelings of deep appreciation for all the life forms:
This miracle machine [...] has gotten me to this
gorgeous park. [...] I can drink in people, babies,
just life, the world and it’s not just the flowers.
It’s everything around it. [...] I can be part of the
world again even though my legs are not doing it
for me. [...] now how can that translate to bigger
and beyond me?
With this evolving idea of a miracle machine, Alana associated the
site of natural beauty with her lived experience of muscular sclerosis
and desire to connect with those around her. Being “part of” her
surroundings involved a sense of soul nourishment that she sought
to ascend onto the collective. Mediated by her scooter, she conveyed
a technology-driven spiritual experience through immersion in
nature and its stunning life forms. Near the end of our conversation,
she observed: “The drawing—it literally just flowed out of me [...].
It led to a really cool place: the introspection of it and, of course, the
music.” Her attention to the Ana Bekoach song and its facilitation
of reflection highlights how the meditative sketching supported
the formation of her miracle machine. Meanwhile, the machine
itself recasts technology as a facilitator of sacred capacities built
into natural environments like those that she activates as a garden
designer. In the Zohar, earthly caves open up into the heavenly
Garden of Eden while other gardens appear as mystical sites, where
protagonists uncover secret knowledge. With this connection to
Kabbalah, Alana’s machine reflects a mobility scooter that operates
like the cave: a way to access the heavenly experience of nature.
Calling natural elements like a tree the “ultimate miracle machine”
and expressing the magnificence of its supported interactions, in-
terlocutors like Tamara, Erin, and Alana invite a mystical interpre-
tation of technology rooted in natural networks, ecosystems, and
biodiverse landscapes that radiate life. These visions expand design
scholarship focused on profound technological powers built into
the existing environment (see [84] for analysis of “natural sensors”
and [150] on mycelium artifacts). In materializing mystical con-
cepts and connections among humans, nature, and God inspired by
Kabbalah, their speculations prompted reflections on the potential
for nature to embody miracle machinery.
4.2.2
Cosmic Systems. Other interlocutors envisioned miracle ma-
chines that facilitated enlightening connections with God. For some,
this vision sprouted from the Tree of Life and its divine attributes
of balance, clarity, splendor, and unity. Avraham, for example, ex-
plained how the Tree of Life embodies opposites coming together.
As a long time Kabbalah artist dedicated to working with the con-
cepts, he described each side of the tree representing a polar oppo-
site: the right side as divine provenance and the left side as free will.
He then interpreted miracles as manifestations of these opposing
sides coming together and balancing. Avraham thus drew his mira-
cle machine as luminescent Hebrew letters and lines, explaining:
The [Ana Bekoach] was playing, so I drew the
first three lines [...] because hopefully the miracle
machine is helping us realize that everything is
[God’s] goodness. [...] the first line is connected
to the right side of the tree of life, the left to the
second side of the tree of life and the third line,
the center of the tree of life [...]. Then on the top, I
wrote Ein Ode Milvado that the Ana Bekoach can
help us to realize: that there is nothing but God
[...]. The machine is the contemplation [...]. Con-
templating the tools like the Ana Bekoach and the
Holy Names [of God] in the Zohar [...] work[s] on
our inner transformation toward states of giving
and love to ultimately realize that there is noth-
ing but God [...]. The miracle machine, which is
the Zohar in the Kabbalah, works, but [only] if
we are using the machine for the right miracle.
Avraham is recounting his machine as contemplation to facilitate
the revelation that “there is nothing but God.” Having created multi-
ple artworks about the Ana Bekoach and listening to the song while
sketching, he observes how the prayer inspired his conceptualiza-
tion of a miracle machine as Hebrew letters containing “spiritual
light” to help realize everything is God’s goodness. Broadening
the miraculous nature of his sketch to other kabbalistic tools, he
then casts the Zohar as a miracle machine. He emphasizes how
the intent behind interacting with the machine—desiring a miracle
to transcend a selfish state of receiving and reach a selfless state
of giving—is crucial for it to “work.” Thus, Avraham’s conceptu-
alization extends beyond contemplative interaction. The machine
can only enact miracles if the motivation for using it stems from
pure desire to emit love (a central ideal in Kabbalah). This machine
refigures how technology functions by not only hinging on divine
interaction, but also divine will of the user to use it for greater good.
Miracle Machine in the Making: Soulful Speculation with Kabbalah
DIS ’23, July 10–14, 2023, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Resonating with Avraham’s spiritual apparatus, Rachel envi-
sioned a miracle machine as a contemplative tool for achieving
clarity by connecting with God. Made of metal (in line with her jew-
elry designs), Rachel aimed to receive divine knowledge through the
energetic Aramaic codes of hidden wisdom bestowed in Kabbalah.
She described her sketch as follows:
There’s a circle inside of a square, which is the
shape of a kabbalistic wedding ring. The circle
represents the 99%, the spiritual world. The square
represents the physical world, which is the 1% and
is the world of limitations. We need to know and
have the clarity on how to live in both worlds
at the same time and when to jump from one
to another. So I thought the two worlds and just
giving me the da’at to do God’s will, I will know
what to do at any given time. And if we have that,
we have miracles. We have everything really [...].
You look at [this large sculpture] and you just
understand the meaning.
Rachel is describing a metallic figuration to unlock the miracle of
God’s will. She calls this the “da’at to do God’s will,” where “da’at”
refers to clarity: a Jewish mystical state of knowledge, where the
Ten Sefirot [divine attributes] of the Tree of Life unite, representing
the midpoint of the left and right sides of the human brain (see
[46]). Using the metaphor of a circle inside a square, she depicts the
expansive spiritual world as inside a smaller physical world of “lim-
itations.” She marks not only a need to exist across worlds, but also
a desire to understand how to navigate them. The miracle comes
from gaining this insight that fulfills the desire for an answer. From
this knowledge, in Rachel’s words, “we have everything.” Rachel’s
miracle machine is therefore a meditative tool for connecting with
divinity, a process she intends with her own design practice. While
casting technology in a familiar form that is metal, the miracle
machine pushes commonplace conceptualizations by facilitating
interactions to receive divine knowledge.
Even as the envisioned miracle machines diverged in their repre-
sentation, Rachel and Avraham shared a crucial recognition of the
divine capacity for systems to reflect back our worlds and ourselves
through contemplative interaction with God. With these benevolent
visions of machinery, they approach technology design as a process
of creating a mechanism to transmit and receive divine knowledge
on spiritual journeys—a process with few parallels in current design
practices, especially in mainstream technology development.
4.2.3
Sensory Systems. Multiple interlocutors envisioned miracle
machines that drew inspiration from kabbalistic descriptions of
sensory faculties. Engaging with excerpts from the Zohar about
hidden light, astrophysicist Bob reflected on sensory limitations:
“In some sense there is light that is completely hidden [...]. Our eyes
cannot see it [...] but instrumentation sees what our eyes cannot see.”
From the same concepts, Rachel grasped that “we’re so limited by the
five senses,” and looked to Kabbalah texts as “tools” for exceeding
sensorial limitations. This potential for sensual excess motivated
several sketches. For instance, Rebecca gravitated toward an excerpt
on roses because it seemed “more sensual” than others. Explaining
that the rose scent facilitates a “sweet intimate moment between two
friends [...] taking a moment to pause and appreciate nature, but to
also tie to some fundamental laws of the universe,” Rebecca described
her machine as an immersive “architecture” of technology:
The miracle machine is a chamber [...]. Prior to
entering it, you record in present tense a personal
miracle as if it has already happened and a collec-
tive miracle as if it already happened [...]. When
you sit [inside], it loops 360 surround sound and
deep acoustics and bass [...]. It’s a whole thing to
enter [...]. In front of the chamber there’s a cold
pool and a hot pool and you dip in between them
and then you put on a satin robe to enter [...].
Inside [...] it smells really good. There’s incense
and a skylight [...]. The actual chamber itself is
really wild stained glass [...]. When you exit, you
eat the supernal bread.
Rebecca’s miracle machine involves non-linear conceptions of time
through expanded aesthetic sensation. To document a present tense
event as if it exists in the past involves a recognition of the past
as shaping the present. In the Zohar, the protagonists similarly
enter and exit divine dimensions like the chamber by activating the
senses of smell in particular (e.g., inhalation of roses and enchanted
apples facilitate magical entry and exit [49]). Further drawing in-
spiration from Judaism, she imagines the chamber made of stained
glass in the formation of a Jewish ritual artifact, the Star of David,
activating the sense of sound with a palpable experience of “deep
acoustics” to physically revitalize oneself. Through the five senses,
she creates an intimate channel between her bodily interiors and
rich external sensations. The act of recording miracles blends with
soulful sensations: touching the opposite water temperatures and
soft satin robe; hearing the 360-surround-sound; witnessing the
artfully sculpted glass; smelling the incense; tasting the heavenly
bread. Inspired by Kabbalah, the miracle machine explores the role
of design in sensory transcendence: moving within and between
past and present realities through interactions with ritual objects
that suggest divine contact in cosmic time.
Also drawing inspiration from zoharic roses while emphasizing
“the power in the lyrics” of the Ana Bekoach music, Zack sketched a
multisensory immersive holodeck for facilitating divine connection
with God and nature:
I thought of it as an experience [...]. We have sen-
sory deprivation tanks, but what if we had a [...]
sensory experience tank? And so I was imagining
[...] the scent of rose coming through air like es-
sential oil vaporizer and the warmth of candles
or natural fire burning and the smell of that fire.
And the participant kneeling in meditation on a
soft cushion of some kind, listening to [...] mysti-
cal music. [...] and then a VR experience [...]. An
apple orchard is something that feels so special to
me and when I saw that on the list [...] I thought
that’d be the perfect virtual natural environment
[...] especially for contemporary city living that’s
so disconnected from nature. [...] That would all
together allow someone to relax and [move] into
a place of safety—like their nervous system—to a
point where that opening of that divine flow and
DIS ’23, July 10–14, 2023, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Halperin & Rosner
a conversation and prayer might be a little more
potent than it would otherwise.
Zack is describing a physical-virtual engagement that culminates
in an experience to calm the nervous system. He describes the
machine activating the sense of smell, the feeling of warmth, the
touch of softness, and the sound of music. For him, immersion in
this sensorium facilitates a meditation that complements city liv-
ing. To enrich these physical sensations, he further conceptualizes
a virtual reality experience of an apple orchard. Like Rebecca’s
sketch, this machine reflects how the Zohar casts roses and apples
as metaphysical openings and passageways to divinity (see [49]).
Interpreting the machine as a means of dialogue and prayer, Zack
locates a connection with God. Thus, Zack’s miracle machine is a
way of ascending bodily sensations to reach divine interaction.
For design research, these miracle machines complicate and sub-
vert normative technology development. Where Erin and Tamara
conceived of wondrous filtration systems (tree roots, mycelia), Avra-
ham and Alana illustrated mystical constellations (lines of Ana
Bekoach, a natural landscape). Meanwhile, Rebecca and Zack pon-
dered multisensory immersions into divine spaces. Each miracle ma-
chine took users beyond present circumstances to open avenues for
communing with other humans and non-humans, whether through
contemplative prompts, extensions of the senses, or prompts for
social and ecological connection. They envisioned technological
mechanisms for accessing soulful experiences with clarity, appreci-
ation, and deepened understanding of the cosmos. In broadening
the purposes that people design for, the meanings assigned to tools,
and the means by which a technology might exist in the world (if
not beyond it), they introduced techniques that enrich how many of
us, as design scholars, conceive of and create interactive machinery.
5
SOULFUL SPECULATION
We have so far probed the possibility of miracle machinery by in-
forming technology development with Jewish mystical thought.
Across study sessions and conversations, interlocutors drew from
past experiences to describe miracles as multiple and variegated:
sometimes momentous events; other times loving acts or remark-
able knowledges. Faced with designing a machine around these
encounters, they described scenarios with and without conven-
tional notions of technology: ecological happenings, contemplative
apparatuses, and sensory oases—sometimes all at once.
Looking toward interactive systems design, our study has set up
a number of challenges for accommodating uncommon and other-
worldly encounters. With our interlocutors, we learn the value of
wonder and allowing design engagements to encompass not only
ways of knowing and being, but also ways of doing that elevate se-
crecy, intuition, and witnessing of non-physical phenomena. What
might it mean to create moments of hidden understanding with
contemporary technologies like Internet of Things devices? How
might designers extend acts of strange wonder with generative AI?
This embrace of the non-physical and transpatial creates new links
to transporting works such as Dinkins’ Conversations with Bina48
or Sweeney’s Deepfake Dad (using AI to speak with ancestors), as
well as holographic strands of thought in the philosophy of knowl-
edge [102]. For design researchers, it places an emphasis on the
inseparability of sensing and realization, where what we come to
recognize and categorize as user input or output (sound, vision,
heat, texture, etc.) registers an entangling of our feeling, thinking,
and meditative selves. Practically, this might mean an imperative
to consider: how present design materials (precious metals, lithium
batteries) remember the past; how our data (oral histories, digital
traces on social media) reflect wider forms of awareness and insight;
and how asking design participants about the soul (conceptually,
practically, technically, metaphorically) can inspirit technology.
While design scholars have long focused on concepts of experi-
ence (what we feel, see, and observe) and interpretation (what we
analyze and think through), engagement with the soul remains less
clear. Understood as spiritual and immaterial engagement, the soul
has opened a range of opportunities for reflecting on the assump-
tions and possibilities underlying existing technology [30, 98, 129].
Our conversations with interlocutors open an additional layer. They
introduce a kind of imaginative process to the design of machinery,
a process we call soulful speculation. Soulful speculation describes
an approach to envisioning future technological developments that
exceed our empirical and interpretive tools. Where design spec-
ulations typically open questions about the future through the
introduction of alternative material worlds, soulful speculations
raise questions through the proposition of alternative immaterial
worlds. As one of our interlocutors reminded, technology can feel
like a soulless site where “miracles do not happen” (Erin). Through
meditative and introspective encounters, we use this study to con-
sider how technology might be or become a site where miracles can
happen. We reflect on how speculative acts might allow designers
to engage aspects of the self and environment that hold emotion,
energy, and liveliness beyond our physical reality observations.
5.1
Participatory “Soul Work”
A first facet of soulful speculation concerns our subtle and provi-
sional engagements with Kabbalah that helped infuse the design
process with soulful techniques —what we deem participatory “soul
work.” Our study sessions elicited design ideas through acts of med-
itation, introspection, and contemplation. Rather than separate
design research methods such as interviewing and sketching from
reflective methods of close reading, our sessions blended the two.
We asked interlocutors to intertwine conversations about Kabbalah
with their own reflections, treating Jewish mystical thought as
a complementary design resource. As a way of “tuning the soul”
[131], we facilitated meditative sketching with prayer music, as
well as introspection via reflective storytelling and contemplation
prompted by the kabbalistic belief system and morals of stories in
source texts. These connected forms of mystical song, imagery, and
text invited us, as analysts, to turn our gaze to the inner rhythms,
hopes, and recollections of our interlocutors.
Of particular note, we saw “soul work” generatively play out
and concretely materialize in the meditative sketching excerise. We
asked interlocutors to draw miracle machines while listening to
a contemporary musical rendition of an age-old kabbalistic medi-
tation and prayer. We devised this activity to potentially harness
the transcendent power of the Ana Bekoach [68] through Ovadia
Hamama’s widely-revered and emotional composition of the sa-
credly encoded lyrics. This decision follows not only our recog-
nition of how kabbalists manipulate language for mystical means
Miracle Machine in the Making: Soulful Speculation with Kabbalah
DIS ’23, July 10–14, 2023, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
[94, 114], but also the role that cantillation, nusah, hymns, and other
musical forms play in forming particular moods and experiences.
The song builds on the linkages drawn among music, spiritual prac-
tices, and transcendent experience [25, 131]. Recall interlocutors
like Avraham and Rachel who knew the alchemy of the Ana Bekoach
letter combinations and aligned their sketching with Kabbalah prac-
tice. Or think back to Zack, who used the music’s reverberations to
support his sketching. Similarly, Alana described channeling the
music as she sketched. Playing the meditative music during the
sketching activity extended existing forms of Kabbalah tradition,
complementing how the sketching acts flowed through the body.
While channeling the meditative flow of the music, people incor-
porated the Kabbalah morals and motifs into their sketches. This
process recalls work by Wyche and colleagues to take seriously
sacred imagery [153], as well as work by Key and colleagues to
consider the powerful presence of inanimate objects [80]. But rather
than live within an image or object, this exploration of kabbalistic
beliefs and stories took a processual form. The miracle machine
sketches evoked a kind of soul-searching, a recounting of ineffable
memories that invited our interlocutors to critically reflect [32, 62],
intimately imagine [52, 130], and daringly dream [137, 142] beyond
“the traditional design brief as we know it” [6].
5.2
The Expansive Span of Speculation
A second dimension to soulful speculation is the span of specula-
tion itself. Our engagement demonstrated a particularly expansive
purview for speculating about time, technology, and use beyond
normative design dimensions. To follow, we unpack how soulful
speculation enlargens the scope of design considerations by ac-
counting for more non-human peripheral users, expansive timelines
of use, and multiple senses in technology-mediated experiences.
5.2.1
More-than-Human Users. Regarding non-human peripheral
users, soulful speculation broadened concerns around who is and is
not a user. Much design literature makes a distinction between those
present and willful in their technological engagement from those
outside the frame of analysis or compelled into engagement [3, 15,
22, 34, 50, 69, 101]. Our interlocutors seemed to expand normative
frames of analysis and speculation around non-human peripheral
users by not only expressing concerns for other species and nature,
but also cosmic entities like deceased souls and divinity. One of
the main contributions of Kabbalah texts is their conceptualization
of God as dependent upon human activity; how, in a cause-and-
effect relationship, all human actions implicate God’s ability to
repair the world [42, 79, 99]. Applying this cultural belief to design
means that God is a peripheral “user” in interactions such as those
involved in Erin’s mycelial network that conceives of politicians
and business people acting with compassion that in turn renews
our ecosystem. Our interest in soulful speculation thus builds upon
prior design research on exoteric Judaism that has looked at how
technology can support or exemplify Judaic practices in particular
[67, 152]. However, our approach also broadens this analysis with
esoteric teachings to consider how interaction designs may work to
repair the world. For example, when Avraham called the Zohar the
miracle machine, he said that it only works when interacted with
to share love for greater good. This expansive outlook extends to
interactions with biodiverse life forms and nature as exemplified by
the ecological relations envisioned in the natural systems as miracle
machines. Soulful speculation thus considers spiritual relations with
nature and divinity at sites of technology development to include
more non-human peripheral users within the frames of analysis.
5.2.2
Temporal Ecologies. What follows accounting for more non-
human peripheral users are expanded timelines of use: a longer
time-frame to speculate about with respect to the soul and non-
humans. Consider how Ben associated miracles with his ancestors
meeting, a connection that culminated in the birth of his daughter.
In this reflection, he drew connections between terrestrial ancestral
threads with the heavenly space beyond it. We see a similar inter-
weaving of temporal registers in Avraham’s ineffable knowledge
of birds (a species that has existed long before humans) and Erin’s
connection with the mycelial landscape (as a site of future plant
growth). These insights build on Black and Indigenous philosophies
[60, 81, 93, 112] that call for deepened relational ethics, or what
design scholars have examined as more-than-human ecologies that
care for the planetary future [48, 80, 138]. As a particularly illustri-
ous example, recall Tamara’s idea of “the ultimate miracle machine”
inspired by the Tree of Life: a tree exactly the way it is—where and
how it exists today and has long existed—not extracted, tokenized,
“rescued,” or humanized [80], and barring anthropocentric abuse,
will continue to live longer than many humans. In recognizing these
temporal ecologies, soulful speculation looks at the past, present,
and future to consider how, for example, extracting raw materials
to power our computers with lithium batteries today may lead to
future souls born into a planet devastated of natural resources.
Our work therefore points to another broadened axis of use: how
human souls and non-humans might be physically absent but still
(immaterially) present in technology. Timelines of technology use
tend to concern the normative lifespan of humans, but not their
souls that are culturally conceived of as immortal. With concern for
how souls proceed and succeed human bodies, “miracle machines”
like trees may be cared for to support the kinds of intergenerational
interactions that Schofield and colleagues consider in speculating
not only about the future but also the past in magical realist de-
sign [122]. We thus suggest that design scholars broaden temporal
registers of use—concepts of use, users, and even the “human” and
“more-than-human” that take into account how someone or some-
thing that existed centuries earlier or that will come to be might
shape technological use today.
5.2.3
Multi-Sensory Interactions. Soulful speculation spans think-
ing about how more sensory faculties might support people in hav-
ing transcendent experiences with technology. Recall how Zack and
Rebecca sketched immersive alcoves for reaching sensational states
of equanimity by activating four to five senses. These sketches
exhibit how thinking beyond one or two senses (as more com-
monly done in design briefs) might help stir the soul with scents,
light, sounds, temperatures, and tastes that orient users inward
with immersive aesthetic joy. Speculating around what multiple
senses might offer and how they might help the body ascend to
an elevated human experience can thus help designers reimagine
what technology is capable of supporting. This expands other spir-
ited calls for making literary-inspired machines deeply expressive
[63–65, 106, 148] but with the transcendent power of multisensory
DIS ’23, July 10–14, 2023, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Halperin & Rosner
user experiences [2, 37, 47, 85, 147]. These expansive sensorial con-
cerns grounded in Kabbalah and personal stories of miracles—peak
human experiences that cut across social geographies and cultures—
augment the emerging subfield of design research on transcendent
experiences [25, 27–29, 95]. Our inquiry suggests that technology
may wield alternative capacities when it nurtures more senses that,
as Zack speculates, help people reach states of relaxation and flow—
or as Rebecca surmises, help rejuvenate. With a wider concern for
soulful concepts, design researchers can probe the unknown and
unseen more-than-human entanglements alongside the known and
seen to configure how miracle machines might actually exist today.
6
CONCLUSION
Survival of near-death experiences. Child birth. The order of the
universe. Such phenomena—what some might consider miracles—
are not the typical sites of technology design. Many people believe
in miracles or have experienced them, but few of us, as design schol-
ars, take them seriously. They reflect a core but under-examined
aspect of the human experience. By engaging Kabbalah, our study
has extended an examination of mystical practices and how they
get implicated in design. During our study sessions, Jewish mysti-
cal materials infused reflective pause into our conversations about
machines and miraculous phenomena. In doing so, they worked to
cultivate a technological premise that some interlocutors ultimately
perceived as soulful. We attribute such shifts in perspective not to
Kabbalah alone, but rather to how the engagements with mystical
thought broaden concepts of more-than-human interaction and
timelines of use. They honed in on the soul as an additional design
resource that brings subtle immaterial inflections to engineering
developments. When we recognize that a miracle machine is within
arm’s reach, we might just realize that miracles are up to all of us.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We warmly thank our interlocutors for their soulful participation.
We also extend great thanks to Gabrielle Benabdallah, Nathaniel
Berman, Tyler Fox, Sourojit Ghosh, Helen Gibson, Nadya Peek,
James Pierce, Jennifer Turns, Julie Vera, our anonymous reviewers,
and the Tactile and Tactical Design Lab at University of Washing-
ton. This material is based upon work that is graciously supported
by the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship
Program under Grant No. DGE-2140004, as well as under NSF Grant
No. 2222242. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommen-
dations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.
REFERENCES
[1] Theodor W Adorno and Gershom Scholem. 2021. Correspondence, 1939-1969.
John Wiley & Sons.
[2] Yoko Akama, Ann Light, and Simon Bowen. 2017. Mindfulness and Technology:
Traces of A Middle Way. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Designing
Interactive Systems (Edinburgh, United Kingdom) (DIS ’17). Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 345–355. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3064663.3064752
[3] Morgan G Ames, Daniela K Rosner, and Ingrid Erickson. 2015. Worship, faith,
and evangelism: Religion as an ideological lens for engineering worlds. In
Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative
Work & Social Computing. 69–81.
[4] Kristina Andersen. 2013. Making magic machines. In 10th European Academy of
Design Conference.
[5] K Andersen. 2013. Making Magic Machines in Proceedings of Crafting the
Future. In 10th European Academy of Design Conference. Göteborg.
[6] Kristina Andersen and Ron Wakkary. 2019. The magic machine workshops:
making personal design knowledge. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI conference
on human factors in computing systems. 1–13.
[7] Hannah Arendt and Gershom Scholem. 2017. The Correspondence of Hannah
Arendt and Gershom Scholem.
[8] Mariam Asad and Christopher A. Le Dantec. 2015. Illegitimate Civic Participa-
tion: Supporting Community Activists on the Ground. In Proceedings of the 18th
ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing
(Vancouver, BC, Canada) (CSCW ’15). Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 1694–1703. https://doi.org/10.1145/2675133.2675156
[9] Jeffrey Bardzell. 2010. HCI and the Essay: Taking on ‘Layers and Layers’ of
Meaning. In CHI 2010 Workshop on Critical Dialogue.
[10] Jeffrey Bardzell and Shaowen Bardzell. 2015. Humanistic hci. Synthesis Lectures
on Human-Centered Informatics 8, 4 (2015), 1–185.
[11] Jeffrey Bardzell and Shaowen Bardzell. 2015. The user reconfigured: on subjec-
tivities of information. In Proceedings of The Fifth Decennial Aarhus Conference
on Critical Alternatives. 133–144.
[12] Jeffrey Bardzell and Shaowen Bardzell. 2016. Humanistic Hci. Interactions 23, 2
(2016), 20–29.
[13] Shaowen Bardzell. 2010. Feminist HCI: taking stock and outlining an agenda for
design. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing
systems. 1301–1310.
[14] Nicole Bauer. 2019. The Kabbalah Centre and Spirituality of the Self. Interna-
tional Journal for the Study of New Religions 10, 1 (2019).
[15] Eric PS Baumer, Jenna Burrell, Morgan G Ames, Jed R Brubaker, and Paul
Dourish. 2015. On the importance and implications of studying technology
non-use. interactions 22, 2 (2015), 52–56.
[16] Genevieve Bell. 2006.
No more SMS from Jesus: Ubicomp, religion and
techno-spiritual practices. In International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing.
Springer, 141–158.
[17] Gabrielle Benabdallah. 2020. Sybil: A Divinatory Home Device. In Companion
Publication of the 2020 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference (Eindhoven,
Netherlands) (DIS’ 20 Companion). Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, 275–279. https://doi.org/10.1145/3393914.3395857
[18] Gabrielle Benabdallah, Ashten Alexander, Sourojit Ghosh, Chariell Glogovac-
Smith, Lacey Jacoby, Caitlin Lustig, Anh Nguyen, Anna Parkhurst, Kathryn
Reyes, Neilly H Tan, et al. 2022. Slanted Speculations: Material Encounters with
Algorithmic Bias. In Designing Interactive Systems Conference. 85–99.
[19] Yehuda Berg. 2013. Dialing God: Daily Connection Book: Technology for the Soul.
Kabbalah Centre International.
[20] David Berger. 1983. Miracles and the Natural Order in Nahmanides. Rabbi
Moses Nahmanides (Ramban): Explorations in his religious and literary virtuosity
(1983), 107–128.
[21] Nathaniel Berman. 2018. Divine and Demonic in the Poetic Mythology of the
Zohar: The" other Side" of Kabbalah. Brill.
[22] Purav Bhardwaj and Cletus V. Joseph. 2020. Plantimate: Personality Augmen-
tation for Fostering Empathy Towards Plants. In Companion Publication of the
2020 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference (Eindhoven, Netherlands)
(DIS’ 20 Companion). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA, 563–567. https://doi.org/10.1145/3393914.3395901
[23] Ananya Bhattacharjee, Jiayu Pang, Angelina Liu, Alex Mariakakis, and
Joseph Jay Williams. 2022. Design Implications for One-Way Text Messaging
Services that Support Psychological Wellbeing. ACM Transactions on Computer-
Human Interaction (2022).
[24] Mark Blythe and Elizabeth Buie. 2014. Chatbots of the gods: imaginary abstracts
for techno-spirituality research. In Proceedings of the 8th Nordic Conference on
Human-Computer Interaction: Fun, Fast, Foundational. 227–236.
[25] Mark Blythe, Elizabeth Buie, et al. 2021. Designs on Transcendence: Sketches
of a TX machine. Foundations and Trends® in Human–Computer Interaction 15,
1 (2021), 1–131.
[26] Joe Bryan and Diego Melo. 2020. Arturo Escobar: Designs for the Pluriverse:
Radical Interdependence, Autonomy, and the Making of Worlds. Journal of
Latin American Geography 19, 3 (2020), 353–357.
[27] Elizabeth Buie. 2016. Transcendhance: a game to facilitate techno-spiritual
design. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human
Factors in Computing Systems. 1367–1374.
[28] Elizabeth Buie. 2019. Let Us Say What We Mean: Towards Operational Defini-
tions for Techno-Spirituality Research. In Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–10.
[29] Elizabeth Anne Buie. 2018. Exploring techno-spirituality: Design strategies for
transcendent user experiences. University of Northumbria at Newcastle (United
Kingdom).
[30] Daragh Byrne, Dan Lockton, Meijie Hu, Miranda Luong, Anuprita Ranade,
Karen Escarcha, Katherine Giesa, Yiwei Huang, Catherine Yochum, Gordon
Robertson, Lisa (Yip Yan) Yeung, Matthew Cruz, Christi Danner, Elizabeth
Wang, Malika Khurana, Zhenfang Chen, Alexander Heyison, and Yixiao Fu.
Miracle Machine in the Making: Soulful Speculation with Kabbalah
DIS ’23, July 10–14, 2023, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
2022. Spooky Technology: The Ethereal and Otherworldly as a Resource for
Design. In Designing Interactive Systems Conference (Virtual Event, Australia)
(DIS ’22). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 759–775.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3532106.3533547
[31] Hillary Carey. 2020. Anti-Oppression Mindsets for Collaborative Design. (2020).
[32] Hillary Carey, Rachel Arredondo, Mihika Bansal, and Christopher Costes. 2022.
Envisioning New Futuring Models: Past, Plurality, and Positionality. In [] With
Design: Reinventing Design Modes: Proceedings of the 9th Congress of the In-
ternational Association of Societies of Design Research (IASDR 2021). Springer,
3618–3618.
[33] Hillary Carey, Alexandra To, Jessica Hammer, and Geoff Kaufman. 2020. Fic-
tional, Interactive Narrative as a Foundation to Talk about Racism. In Companion
Publication of the 2020 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference. 171–177.
[34] Michelle Chang, Chenyi Shen, Aditi Maheshwari, Andreea Danielescu, and
Lining Yao. 2022. Patterns and Opportunities for the Design of Human-Plant
Interaction. In Designing Interactive Systems Conference. 925–948.
[35] Alice Chirico, Pietro Cipresso, David B Yaden, Federica Biassoni, Giuseppe Riva,
and Andrea Gaggioli. 2017. Effectiveness of immersive videos in inducing awe:
an experimental study. Scientific reports 7, 1 (2017), 1–11.
[36] Alice Chirico, Francesco Ferrise, Lorenzo Cordella, and Andrea Gaggioli. 2018.
Designing awe in virtual reality: An experimental study. Frontiers in psychology
8 (2018), 2351.
[37] Jean Ho Chu, Daniel Harley, Jamie Kwan, Melanie McBride, and Ali Mazalek.
2016. Sensing History: Contextualizing Artifacts with Sensory Interactions and
Narrative Design.. In Conference on Designing Interactive Systems. 1294–1302.
[38] Adele E Clarke, Carrie Friese, and Rachel S Washburn. 2017. Situational analysis:
Grounded theory after the interpretive turn. Sage Publications.
[39] Anna Claudia. 2019. Bots as Storytellers: An Analysis of the Use of Facebook Mes-
senger Chatbots by Non-Profit Organizations and Their Added Value for Advocacy
Purposes. Ph. D. Dissertation. Vrije Universiteit Brussel.
[40] Jennifer Cornelius. 2017. Five minute meditation used to impact workplace
meetings. Ph. D. Dissertation. Pepperdine University.
[41] Sasha Costanza-Chock. 2020. Design justice: Community-led practices to build
the worlds we need. The MIT Press.
[42] Joseph Dan. 2007. Kabbalah: A very short introduction. Vol. 162. Oxford Univer-
sity Press.
[43] Giambattista Della Porta. 1957. Natural Magick. Basic Books.
[44] Jill P Dimond, Michaelanne Dye, Daphne LaRose, and Amy S Bruckman. 2013.
Hollaback! The role of storytelling online in a social movement organization.
In Proceedings of the 2013 conference on Computer supported cooperative work.
477–490.
[45] Carl DiSalvo and Jonathan Lukens. 2011. Nonanthropocentrism and the nonhu-
man in design: possibilities for designing new forms of engagement with and
through technology. From social butterfly to engaged citizen: urban informatics,
social media, ubiquitous computing, and mobile technology to support citizen
engagement 421 (2011).
[46] Gustav Dreifuss. 2005. The union of opposites in the Kabbalah. Journal of
Jungian Theory and Practice 7, 1 (2005).
[47] Daniel A Epstein, Felicia Cordeiro, James Fogarty, Gary Hsieh, and Sean A Mun-
son. 2016. Crumbs: lightweight daily food challenges to promote engagement
and mindfulness. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems. 5632–5644.
[48] Arturo Escobar. 2018. Designs for the Pluriverse. In Designs for the Pluriverse.
Duke University Press.
[49] Eitan Fishbane. 2018. The Art of Mystical Narrative: A Poetics of the Zohar. Oxford
University Press, USA.
[50] Laura Forlano. 2016. Decentering the human in the design of collaborative cities.
Design Issues 32, 3 (2016), 42–54.
[51] Laura Forlano. 2017. Posthumanism and design. She Ji: The Journal of Design,
Economics, and Innovation 3, 1 (2017), 16–29.
[52] Sarah Fox, Noura Howell, Richmond Wong, and Franchesca Spektor. 2019.
Vivewell: speculating near-future menstrual tracking through current data
practices. In Proceedings of the 2019 on Designing Interactive Systems Conference.
541–552.
[53] Sarah E Fox, Samantha Shorey, Franchesca Spektor, and Daniela K Rosner. 2020.
Crafting everyday resistance through lightweight design. In Proceedings of the
2020 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference. 101–113.
[54] Harry Freedman. 2019. Kabbalah: secrecy, scandal and the soul. Bloomsbury
Publishing.
[55] Batya Friedman and Lisa P. Nathan. 2010. Multi-Lifespan Information System
Design: A Research Initiative for the Hci Community. In Proceedings of the
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Atlanta, Georgia,
USA) (CHI ’10). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
2243–2246. https://doi.org/10.1145/1753326.1753665
[56] Batya Friedman and Daisy Yoo. 2017. Pause: A Multi-Lifespan Design Mecha-
nism. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (Denver, Colorado, USA) (CHI ’17). Association for Computing Machin-
ery, New York, NY, USA, 460–464. https://doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3026031
[57] William Gaver, Mark Blythe, Andy Boucher, Nadine Jarvis, John Bowers, and
Peter Wright. 2010. The prayer companion: openness and specificity, materiality
and spirituality. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in
computing systems. 2055–2064.
[58] Elizabeth Gerber. 2007. Devotion to an innovation process: The case of human
centered design. ProQuest.
[59] G Gershom. 1977. Zohar The Book of Splendor: Basic: Readings from the Kabbalah.
Rider.
[60] Julia Gibson. In submission. Holographic Ethics for Intergenerational Justice:
Planetary Politics Through the Prism. (In submission).
[61] David Goldstein, Yeruh. am Fishel Lachower, and Isaiah Tishby. 1989. The wisdom
of the Zohar: an anthology of texts. Vol. 1. Oxford [England]: Published for the
Littman Library by Oxford University Press.
[62] Neilly H. Tan, Brian Kinnee, Dana Langseth, Sean A. Munson, and Audrey
Desjardins. 2022. Critical-Playful Speculations with Cameras in the Home. In
Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
1–22.
[63] Brett A. Halperin. 2022. Airbrush Hyperfabric: Designing Interactive Story-
telling Fabric Connected to Motion Graphics and Music. Interactions 29, 3 (apr
2022), 8–9. https://doi.org/10.1145/3529705
[64] Brett A Halperin, Gary Hsieh, Erin McElroy, James Pierce, and Daniela K Ros-
ner. 2023. Probing a Community-Based Conversational Storytelling Agent to
Document Digital Stories of Housing Insecurity. In Proceedings of the 2023
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Hamburg, Ger-
many) (CHI ’23). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3544548.3581109
[65] Brett A. Halperin and Stephanie M. Lukin. 2023. Envisioning Narrative In-
telligence: A Creative Visual Storytelling Anthology. In Proceedings of the
2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Hamburg, Ger-
many) (CHI ’23). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3544548.3580744
[66] Brett A. Halperin and Erin McElroy. 2023. Temporal Tensions in Digital Story
Mapping for Housing Justice: Rethinking Time and Technology in Community-
Based Design. In Designing Interactive Systems Conference (Pittsburgh, Pennsyl-
vania) (DIS ’23). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3563657.3596088
[67] Jessica Hammer. 2020. Envisioning Jewish HCI. In Extended Abstracts of the
2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–10.
[68] Yuval Harari. 2019. “Practical Kabbalah” and the Jewish Tradition of Magic.
Aries 19, 1 (2019), 38–82.
[69] Fabian Hemmert, Andreas Bell, Miriam Glöß, Maximilian Klaiß, Katharina Kurm,
Ina van der Linde, Kathrin Neumann, Gürkan Orak, Katlin Sommer, Thanh Ta
Dui, Paulina Wagner, Becky Weier, and Michael Zalesak. 2020. Designing
Human-God Interfaces. In Proceedings of the Conference on Mensch Und Computer
(Magdeburg, Germany) (MuC ’20). Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, 393–397. https://doi.org/10.1145/3404983.3409997
[70] Alexis Hiniker and Jacob O Wobbrock. 2022. Reclaiming attention: Christianity
and HCI. Interactions 29, 4 (2022), 40–44.
[71] Noura Howell, Britta F. Schulte, Amy Twigger Holroyd, Rocío Fatás Arana,
Sumita Sharma, and Grace Eden. 2021. Calling for a plurality of perspectives
on design futuring: an un-manifesto. In Extended Abstracts of the 2021 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–10.
[72] Johan Huizinga. 2014. Homo ludens: A study of the play-element in culture.
Routledge.
[73] Boaz Huss. 2015. Kabbalah and the Politics of Inauthenticity: The Controversies
over the Kabbalah Center. Numen 62, 2-3 (2015), 197–225.
[74] Boaz Huss. 2021. Academic Study of Kabbalah and Occultist Kabbalah. Occult
Roots of Religious Studies (2021), 104.
[75] Boaz Huss and Joel A Linsider. 2005. Ask No Questions: Gershom Scholem and
the Study of Contemporary Jewish Mysticism. Modern Judaism 25, 2 (2005),
141–158.
[76] Mahmoud Mohamed Hussien Ahmed, Chaklam Silpasuwanchai, Kavous Sale-
hzadeh Niksirat, and Xiangshi Ren. 2017. Understanding the role of human
senses in interactive meditation. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems. 4960–4965.
[77] John L Jackson Jr. 2013. Thin Description: Ethnography and the African Hebrew
Israelites of Jerusalem. Harvard University Press.
[78] James W Jones. 2001. Transference AND Transcendence. In Contemporary
Psychoanalysis and Religion. Yale University Press, 34–67.
[79] Aryeh Kaplan and Nehunia ben HaKana. 1989. The Bahir. Weiser Books.
[80] Cayla Key, Cally Gatehouse, and Nick Taylor. 2022. Feminist Care in the Anthro-
pocene: Packing and Unpacking Tensions in Posthumanist HCI. In Designing
Interactive Systems Conference. 677–692.
[81] Robin Kimmerer. 2013. Braiding sweetgrass: Indigenous wisdom, scientific knowl-
edge and the teachings of plants. Milkweed editions.
[82] Lauren Klein and Ryan Dubin. 2021. A Socially Distanced Robotic Menorah Set.
In Companion of the 2021 ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot
Interaction. 653–654.
DIS ’23, July 10–14, 2023, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Halperin & Rosner
[83] Sandjar Kozubaev, Chris Elsden, Noura Howell, Marie Louise Juul Søndergaard,
Nick Merrill, Britta Schulte, and Richmond Y Wong. 2020. Expanding modes
of reflection in design futuring. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–15.
[84] Stacey Kuznetsov, William Odom, James Pierce, and Eric Paulos. 2011. Nurturing
natural sensors. In Proceedings of the 13th international conference on Ubiquitous
computing. 227–236.
[85] Mei-Kei Lai and Siu Wing Chung. 2021. TranScent in Stillness: Exploring the
Feasibility of Using Incense Art with Virtual Reality for Meditation. In 10th
International Conference on Digital and Interactive Arts. 1–7.
[86] Amy G Lam. 2014. Effects of five-minute mindfulness meditation on mental health
care professionals. The Chicago School of Professional Psychology.
[87] Amanda Lazar, Norman Makoto Su, Jeffrey Bardzell, and Shaowen Bardzell. 2019.
Parting the Red Sea: sociotechnical systems and lived experiences of menopause.
In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems.
1–16.
[88] Jeff Levin and Lea Steele. 2005. The transcendent experience: conceptual, theo-
retical, and epidemiologic perspectives. Explore 1, 2 (2005), 89–101.
[89] Lika Haizhou Liu, Xi Lu, Richard Martinez, Dennis Wang, Fannie Liu, Andrés
Monroy-Hernández, and Daniel A Epstein. 2022. Mindful Garden: Supporting
Reflection on Biosignals in a Co-Located Augmented Reality Mindfulness Expe-
rience. In Companion Publication of the 2022 Conference on Computer Supported
Cooperative Work and Social Computing. 201–204.
[90] Maya Livio and Laura Devendorf. 2022. The Eco-Technical Interface: Attun-
ing to the Instrumental. In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (New Orleans, LA, USA) (CHI ’22). Associa-
tion for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 101, 12 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3491102.3501851
[91] Caitlin Lustig and Daniela Rosner. 2022. From Explainability to Ineffability? ML
Tarot and the Possibility of Inspiriting Design. In Designing Interactive Systems
Conference. 123–136.
[92] Caitlin (Caitie) Lustig and Hong-An (Ann) Wu. 2022. Tarot as a Technology of
Care. Interactions 29, 4 (jun 2022), 24–29. https://doi.org/10.1145/3536392
[93] Lee Maracle. 2015. Memory serves: oratories. NeWest Press.
[94] Mitchell P Marcus. 1999. Computer science, the informational, and Jewish
mysticism. Technology in Society 21, 4 (1999), 363–371.
[95] Robert B Markum and Kentaro Toyama. 2020. Digital Technology, Meditative
and Contemplative Practices, and Transcendent Experiences. In Proceedings of
the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–14.
[96] Joe Marshall, Steve Benford, and Tony Pridmore. 2010. Deception and Magic in
Collaborative Interaction. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (Atlanta, Georgia, USA) (CHI ’10). Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 567–576. https://doi.org/10.1145/
1753326.1753410
[97] Abraham H Maslow. 1969. Various meanings of transcendence. Journal of
Transpersonal Psychology 1, 1 (1969), 56–66.
[98] Michael Massimi and Andrea Charise. 2009. Dying, death, and mortality: towards
thanatosensitivity in HCI. In CHI’09 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in
Computing Systems. 2459–2468.
[99] Daniel Matt. 2002. Zohar: Annotated & Explained. Skylight Paths Publishing.
[100] John McCarthy and Peter Wright. 2004. Technology as experience. interactions
11, 5 (2004), 42–43.
[101] Joshua McVeigh-Schultz, Jen Stein, Jeff Watson, and Scott Fisher. 2012. Extend-
ing the Lifelog to Non-Human Subjects: Ambient Storytelling for Human-Object
Relationships. In Proceedings of the 20th ACM International Conference on Mul-
timedia (Nara, Japan) (MM ’12). Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, 1205–1208. https://doi.org/10.1145/2393347.2396419
[102] Manulani Aluli Meyer. 2013. Holographic epistemology: Native common sense.
China Media Research 9, 2 (2013), 94–101.
[103] Lydia Michie, Madeline Balaam, John McCarthy, Timur Osadchiy, and Kellie
Morrissey. 2018. From Her Story, to Our Story: Digital Storytelling as Public
Engagement around Abortion Rights Advocacy in Ireland (CHI ’18). Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–15. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3173574.3173931
[104] Julia Mossbridge. 2016. Designing transcendence technology. Psychology’s New
Design Science and the Reflective Practitioner (2016), 1–27.
[105] Michael J Muller, Ellen Christiansen, Bonnie Nardi, and Susan Dray. 2001. Spiri-
tual life and information technology. Commun. ACM 44, 3 (2001), 82–82.
[106] Janet H Murray. 2017. Hamlet on the Holodeck, updated edition: The Future of
Narrative in Cyberspace. MIT press.
[107] Caroline Myss and James Finley. 2009. Transforming Trauma: A Seven-step
Process for Spiritual Healing. Sounds True.
[108] Hye Yeon Nam. 2008. Wonderland (2007). In ACM SIGGRAPH 2008 art gallery.
108–108.
[109] Andrew B Newberg and Eugene G d’Aquili. 2000. The neuropsychology of
religious and spiritual experience. Journal of consciousness studies 7, 11-12
(2000), 251–266.
[110] Teresa K O’Leary, Dhaval Parmar, Stefan Olafsson, Michael Paasche-Orlow,
Timothy Bickmore, and Andrea G Parker. 2022. Community Dynamics in
Technospiritual Interventions: Lessons Learned from a Church-based mHealth
Pilot. In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
[111] Teresa K O’Leary, Elizabeth Stowell, Jessica A Hoffman, Michael Paasche-Orlow,
Timothy Bickmore, and Andrea G Parker. 2021. Examining the Intersections of
Race, Religion & Community Technologies: A Photovoice Study. In Proceedings
of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–19.
[112] Romy Opperman. 2020. Race, Ecology, Freedom: Climate Justice and Environmen-
tal Racism. Ph. D. Dissertation. Pennsylvania State University.
[113] Romy Opperman. 2022. Racism. The Philosopher (2022).
[114] Schwartz Oscar. 2019. Natural Language Processing Dates Back to Kabbalist
Mystics. IEEE Spectrum (2019).
[115] Michele Pierson. 2002. Special effects: Still in search of wonder. Columbia
University Press.
[116] Denise Quesnel, Ekaterina R Stepanova, Ivan A Aguilar, Patrick Pennefather,
and Bernhard E Riecke. 2018. Creating AWE: artistic and scientific practices in
research-based design for exploring a profound immersive installation. In 2018
IEEE Games, Entertainment, Media Conference (GEM). IEEE, 1–207.
[117] Majken Kirkegaard Rasmussen. 2013. Magical Realities in Interaction Design
(TEI ’13). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 125–128.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2460625.2460644
[118] Joan Sol Roo, Renaud Gervais, Jeremy Frey, and Martin Hachet. 2017. Inner
Garden: Connecting Inner States to a Mixed Reality Sandbox for Mindfulness. In
Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(Denver, Colorado, USA) (CHI ’17). Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, 1459–1470. https://doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025743
[119] Joan Sol Roo, Renaud Gervais, Jeremy Frey, and Martin Hachet. 2017. Inner
garden: Connecting inner states to a mixed reality sandbox for mindfulness. In
Proceedings of the 2017 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems.
1459–1470.
[120] Christine Satchell and Paul Dourish. 2009. Beyond the user: use and non-use
in HCI. In Proceedings of the 21st annual conference of the Australian computer-
human interaction special interest group: Design: Open 24/7. 9–16.
[121] Jan Rippentrop Schnell. 2020. Better living through anger: religious women
negotiating virtuous anger through community organizing. The University of
Iowa.
[122] Tom Schofield, John Bowers, and Diego Trujillo Pisanty. 2020. Magical Realist
Design. In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference
(Eindhoven, Netherlands) (DIS ’20). Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, 1873–1886. https://doi.org/10.1145/3357236.3395530
[123] Tom Schofield, Diego Trujillo Pisanty, Gabriella Arrigoni, Kim Reynolds, and
Rachel Pattinson. 2019. Magical Realism and Augmented Reality: Designing
Apps with Children in a Cultural Institution (DIS ’19). Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 737–749.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3322276.
3322293
[124] Gershom Scholem. 2003. Walter Benjamin: The story of a friendship. New York
Review of Books.
[125] Gershom Gerhard Scholem. 1991. Origins of the Kabbalah. In Origins of the
Kabbalah. Princeton University Press.
[126] Gershom Gerhard Scholem. 1995. Major trends in Jewish mysticism. Random
House Digital, Inc.
[127] Gershom Gerhard Scholem. 1997. On the mystical shape of the Godhead: basic
concepts in the Kabbalah. Mysticism and Kabbalah.
[128] Martin EP Seligman. 2011. Flourish: a new understanding of happiness and
well-being–and how to achieve them. Boston: Nicholas Brealey (2011).
[129] William Seymour and Max Van Kleek. 2020. Does Siri have a soul? Exploring
voice assistants through shinto design fictions. In Extended Abstracts of the 2020
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–12.
[130] Sumita Sharma, Britta F. Schulte, Rocío Fatás, Noura Howell, Amy Twigger Hol-
royd, and Grace Eden. 2022. Design Futuring for Love, Friendship, and Kinships:
Five Perspectives on Intimacy. In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems Extended Abstracts. 1–14.
[131] Chani Haran Smith. 2008. Tuning the Soul: Music as a spiritual process in the
teachings of Rabbi Nahman of Bratzlav. University of London, University College
London (United Kingdom).
[132] Steven B Smith. 1993. Gershom Scholem and Leo Strauss: Notes toward a
German-Jewish Dialogue. Modern Judaism (1993), 209–229.
[133] Velvet Spors, Hanne Gesine Wagner, Martin Flintham, Pat Brundell, and David
Murphy. 2021. Selling Glossy, Easy Futures: A Feminist Exploration of Commer-
cial Mental-Health-Focused Self-Care Apps’ Descriptions in the Google Play
Store. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (Yokohama, Japan) (CHI ’21). Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, Article 404, 17 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.
3445500
[134] Walter Terence Stace. 1960. Mysticism and philosophy. Philosophy 37, 140
(1960).
Miracle Machine in the Making: Soulful Speculation with Kabbalah
DIS ’23, July 10–14, 2023, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
[135] Angelika Strohmayer, Janis Lena Meissner, Alexander Wilson, Sarah Charlton,
and Laura McIntyre. 2020. "We Come Together as One...and Hope for Solidarity
to Live on": On Designing Technologies for Activism and the Commemoration of
Lost Lives. In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Confer-
ence (Eindhoven, Netherlands) (DIS ’20). Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 87–100. https://doi.org/10.1145/3357236.3395452
[136] Sharifa Sultana and Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed. 2019. Witchcraft and HCI: Morality,
Modernity, and Postcolonial Computing in Rural Bangladesh. In Proceedings
of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Glasgow,
Scotland Uk) (CHI ’19). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA, 1–15. https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300586
[137] Cella M Sum, Rahaf Alharbi, Franchesca Spektor, Cynthia L Bennett, Christina N
Harrington, Katta Spiel, and Rua Mae Williams. 2022. Dreaming Disability
Justice in HCI. In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
Extended Abstracts. 1–5.
[138] Jordan Taylor. 2022. Decoloniality in computing: an interview with Dipto Das.
XRDS: Crossroads, The ACM Magazine for Students 28, 4 (2022), 32–36.
[139] Jordan Taylor and Adinawa Adjagbodjou. 2022. DEI in computing: centering
the margins. , 6–7 pages.
[140] Alexandra To, Safinah Ali, Geoff Kaufman, and Jessica Hammer. 2016. Integrat-
ing Curiosity and Uncertainty in Game Design. Digra/fdg (2016).
[141] Alexandra To, Hillary Carey, Riya Shrivastava, Jessica Hammer, and Geoff
Kaufman. 2022. Interactive Fiction Provotypes for Coping with Interpersonal
Racism. In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems. 1–14.
[142] Alexandra To, Anny Fan, Catherine Kildunne, Eda Zhang, Geoff Kaufman, and
Jessica Hammer. 2016. Treehouse Dreams: A Game-Based Method for Eliciting
Interview Data from Children. In Proceedings of the 2016 Annual Symposium on
Computer-Human Interaction in Play Companion Extended Abstracts. 307–314.
[143] Sherry Turkle. 2011. Evocative objects: Things we think with. MIT press.
[144] Jay Vidyarthi and Bernhard E Riecke. 2013. Mediated meditation: cultivating
mindfulness with sonic cradle. In CHI’13 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors
in Computing Systems. 2305–2314.
[145] Jay Vidyarthi and Bernhard E Riecke. 2014. Interactively mediating experiences
of mindfulness meditation. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies
72, 8-9 (2014), 674–688.
[146] Birrell Thomas Walsh. 1999. The practice of praying for others: Eight examples
from late twentieth-century America. California Institute of Integral Studies.
[147] Vanissa Wanick, Guilherme Xavier, and Erhan Ekmekcioglu. 2018. Virtual
transcendence experiences: Exploring technical and design challenges in multi-
sensory environments. In Proceedings of the 10th International Workshop on
Immersive Mixed and Virtual Environment Systems. 7–12.
[148] Noah Wardrip-Fruin. 2009. Expressive Processing: Digital fictions, computer
games, and software studies. MIT press.
[149] Vanessa Watts. 2013. Indigenous place-thought and agency amongst humans
and non humans (First Woman and Sky Woman go on a European world tour!).
Decolonization: Indigeneity, Education & Society 2, 1 (2013).
[150] Jennifer Weiler, Piyum Fernando, Nipuni Siyambalapitiya, and Stacey Kuznetsov.
2019. Mycelium artifacts: Exploring shapeable and accessible biofabrication. In
Companion Publication of the 2019 on Designing Interactive Systems Conference
2019 Companion. 69–72.
[151] Mikael Wiberg, Alex Taylor, and Daniela Rosner (Eds.). 2022. Interactions 29, 4
(2022).
[152] Allison Woodruff, Sally Augustin, and Brooke Foucault. 2007. Sabbath Day
Home Automation: "It’s like Mixing Technology and Religion". In Proceedings
of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (San Jose,
California, USA) (CHI ’07). Association for Computing Machinery, New York,
NY, USA, 527–536. https://doi.org/10.1145/1240624.1240710
[153] Susan P. Wyche, Kelly E. Caine, Benjamin K. Davison, Shwetak N. Patel, Michael
Arteaga, and Rebecca E. Grinter. 2009. Sacred Imagery in Techno-Spiritual
Design. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (Boston, MA, USA) (CHI ’09). Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 55–58. https://doi.org/10.1145/1518701.1518710
[154] Susan P. Wyche and Rebecca E. Grinter. 2009. Extraordinary Computing: Re-
ligion as a Lens for Reconsidering the Home. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Boston, MA, USA) (CHI
’09). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 749–758.
https://doi.org/10.1145/1518701.1518817
[155] Susan P. Wyche, Gillian R. Hayes, Lonnie D. Harvel, and Rebecca E. Grinter.
2006. Technology in Spiritual Formation: An Exploratory Study of Computer
Mediated Religious Communications. In Proceedings of the 2006 20th Anniversary
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work (Banff, Alberta, Canada)
(CSCW ’06). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 199–208.
https://doi.org/10.1145/1180875.1180908
[156] Daisy Yoo, Milli Lake, Trond Nilsen, Molly E. Utter, Robert Alsdorf, Theon-
este Bizimana, Lisa P. Nathan, Mark Ring, Elizabeth J. Utter, Robert F. Utter,
and Batya Friedman. 2013. Envisioning across Generations: A Multi-Lifespan
Information System for International Justice in Rwanda. In Proceedings of the
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Paris, France) (CHI
’13). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2527–2536.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2470654.2481349
