S P E C I A L I S S U E A R T I C L E
Predictive or imaginative futures? Experimenting with
alternative future-making approaches
Ilaria Durante
|
Claudio Dell'Era
|
Stefano Magistretti
|
Cristina Tu Anh Pham
School of Management, Politecnico di Milano,
Milan, Italy
Correspondence
Ilaria Durante, School of Management,
Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy.
Email: ilaria.durante@polimi.it
Funding information
Italian Ministry of University and Research
(MUR)
Future-making, the act of imagining and producing the future, is becoming increas-
ingly relevant in scholarly and practitioner debates. In a constantly evolving society
where the future is difficult to navigate, there is an urgent need to explore new and
innovative ways of imagining plausible futures that are more desirable to people. The
future-making literature proposes different practices, tools, options and possibilities
for envisioning futures and advancing the debate on issues that affect society. To
explore how different future-making approaches influence the generation of future
scenarios, we conducted an experiment in which we asked 64 practitioners partici-
pating in teams to anticipate and imagine futures using two different future-making
approaches: predictive and imaginative. The resulting future scenarios were then
evaluated by 227 practitioners in a postexperiment survey measuring their plausibil-
ity and desirability, as well as their similarities and differences in terms of future sce-
nario generation. Our study contributes to both theory and practice. In particular, we
contribute to the future-making debate and enrich current understanding of the dif-
ferent processes and tools adopted in predictive and imaginative future-making using
an experimental approach. Our study also supports practitioners in unpacking the
potential
of
adopting
different
types
of
future-making,
from
predictive
to
imaginative.
K E Y W O R D S
design, experiment, foresight, future-making, imagination, innovation
1
|
INTRODUCTION
In recent years, the scholarly and practitioner communities have
shown increasing interest in innovative approaches to future-making
(Gümüsay & Reinecke, 2022; Wenzel, 2022). In an ever-evolving soci-
ety where predicting the future is difficult, organizations struggle to
make decisions about what to implement and where to invest
resources (Vettorello et al., 2022). Unpredictable market conditions
and geopolitical instability leave organizations ill-equipped to make
informed decisions (Hölzle et al., 2022). As a result, mastering future-
making skills is more important than ever. In this context, organiza-
tions need to develop future thinking capabilities to proactively design
strategies to respond to change and remain competitive (Bühring &
Liedtka,
2018).
As
Rindova
and
Martins
(2021)
emphasize,
organizations must not only consider existing alternatives but also
imagine future possibilities when engaging in the process of develop-
ing novel strategies. The act of future-making has been defined as
how
organizational
actors
produce
and
enact
the
future
(Wenzel, 2022), and thus a new set of organizational capabilities, prac-
tices, and routines is required to construct and give sense to the envi-
sioned future (Thompson & Byrne, 2022).
The future-making literature at the intersection of innovation,
strategy, design, and organization studies is broad and informed by
numerous perspectives (Comi & Whyte, 2018; Fergnani, 2022a;
Wenzel, 2022). While many scholars have focused on predictive
approaches to explore existing alternatives to increase future pre-
paredness and gain competitive advantage (Marinkovic et al., 2022),
recent research has emphasized the importance of imaginative
Received: 26 September 2023
Revised: 12 January 2024
Accepted: 5 February 2024
DOI: 10.1111/caim.12603
Creat Innov Manag. 2024;1–22.
wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/caim
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
1
approaches to reflect on alternatives that do not yet exist in order to
design the future (Gümüsay & Reinecke, 2022). While some scholars
underscore the potential of corporate foresight as a formalized way to
help organizations anticipate the future (Fergnani, 2022a), others
emphasize the potential of other imaginative and practice-based
methodologies to design the future (Rindova & Martins, 2021;
Simeone & D'Ippolito, 2022). Wenzel et al. (2020) urge scholars to
study the under investigated phenomenon of future-making practices
in organizations. Responding to Wenzel (2022), Fergnani (2022b) sug-
gests that scholars should also study the established practices of cor-
porate
foresight
scholarship
as
a
future-making
phenomenon.
Gümüsay and Reinecke (2022) invite scholars to delve deeper into
methodologies to imagine not only plausible and probable but also
desirable futures, stimulating methodological and theoretical innova-
tion while maintaining scientific rigor. Although Rindova and Martins
(2022) focus on ways to resolve the tension between plausibility and
desirability in the generation of futures scenarios, in practice no
research has investigated the levels of plausibility and desirability of
future scenarios generated by different future-making approaches.
Thus, to fill this relevant gap, this study explores the differences in
plausibility and desirability of scenarios created through predictive and
imaginative future-making.
To do so, we conducted a future-making experiment with 64 prac-
titioners participating in teams. We designed the experiment to com-
pare the characteristics of imaginative and predictive future-making
following the classification adapted from Augustine et al. (2019), orga-
nized as an experiment according to the guidelines of Podsakoff and
Podsakoff (2019). Participants in the predictive future-making cluster
started with signals of change and future forces as insights to begin to
predict the future (Rohrbeck & Kum, 2018; Vecchiato, 2012). Partici-
pants in the imaginative future-making cluster started from provoca-
tive future values (Tharp & Tharp, 2022) to negotiate the future
through reflection and discussion (Rindova & Martins, 2021). Using
the two different future-making approaches, participants generated
12 different scenarios, which were then evaluated by 227 practitioners
in a postexperiment survey. After collecting the survey responses, we
analysed the results and triangulated the information from the experi-
ment to explore the differences in plausibility and desirability of the
scenarios generated.
This study contributes relevant insights to both theory and prac-
tice. First, we contribute to the debate on the differences between
future-making
approaches
and
the
resulting
future
scenarios
(Fergnani, 2022a; Gümüsay & Reinecke, 2022; Wenzel, 2022). Previ-
ous research has framed future scenarios derived from predictive and
imaginative
future-making
approaches
as
inherently
different
(Augustine et al., 2019). For this reason, studies have primarily
focused on the differences between the characteristics of the
approaches (Fergnani, 2022a; Wenzel et al., 2020) rather than
the future scenarios generated (Augustine et al., 2019). However, our
results suggest that the future scenarios generated by the two
approaches are not inherently different, as they also share similarities.
Specifically,
our
study
suggests
that
while
the
future-making
approaches differ in terms of desirability, they are similar in terms of
plausibility.
Moreover,
we
contribute
to
a
more
nuanced
understanding of the differences between the desirability of predic-
tive
future-making
scenarios
(Rohrbeck
&
Kum,
2018;
Vecchiato, 2012) and imaginative future-making scenarios (Rindova &
Martins, 2021; Tharp & Tharp, 2022) by showing that the true differ-
ences in desirability are due to differences in the framing of the
benefiting actors and their attitudes toward temporal events. While
predictive future-making scenarios frame the benefiting actors as indi-
viduals or organizations with a diagnostic approach (Furnari, 2018) to
temporal events, imaginative future-making scenarios frame the
benefiting
actors
as
a
collective
with
a
prognostic
approach
(Furnari, 2018) to temporal events. This nuance enriches our under-
standing of the different approaches, and provides managers with
practical guidance on how to adopt each. Second, we contribute to
the future-making literature (Wenzel, 2022) by reinforcing the view
that desirability, not as fantasy (Augustine et al., 2019) but as an indi-
vidual and organizational aspiration (Gümüsay & Reinecke, 2022), is a
crucial dimension to consider in the future-making process. By pro-
posing a dichotomous approach (i.e., predictive and imaginative), the
experiment we conducted (Podsakoff & Podsakoff, 2019) responds to
the call for scholars to stimulate methodological advances in how to
study future-making in practice (Gümüsay & Reinecke, 2022). Finally,
our study supports practitioners in identifying the characteristics and
potentials of adopting different future-making approaches in terms of
the process to be followed and the performance achieved.
2
|
THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
Future-making encompasses a range of formalized practices for pre-
dicting alternative futures, such as corporate foresight practices, and
less formalized practices, such as everyday activities that organiza-
tional actors engage in to look at the future (Wenzel, 2022). According
to Beckert (2021), management tools such as strategic planning and
technology forecasting should be studied as future-making because
they use images of the future to help organizations cope with uncer-
tainty. Small-scale projects and experiments on alternative ways of
organizing are also interesting examples of future-making (Gümüsay &
Reinecke, 2022; Schmidt & Brinks, 2017). The futures generated by
future-making approaches range from possible and probable to desir-
able (Whyte et al., 2022).
Given the lack of a clear definition of future-making approaches,
we defined predictive and imaginative future-making approaches
according to four key dimensions extracted from Augustine et al.'s
(2019) classification of futures (Table 1). The first dimension (concep-
tion) describes the future-making process followed to generate future
scenarios. The second dimension (evaluation) refers to the set of
options considered in the construction of futures. The third dimension
(knowledge) describes the type of knowledge involved in future-
making. The fourth dimension (temporal representation) refers to the
way in which the future is related to present and past.
The predictive future-making approach focuses on plausibility as
an important variable to evaluate future scenarios generated through
2
DURANTE ET AL.
 14678691, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/caim.12603 by <shibboleth>-member@chalmers.se, Wiley Online Library on [09/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
foresight practices such as scenario planning (Amer et al., 2013;
Bradfield et al., 2005). However, it is crucial to not only evaluate the
plausibility of the future scenarios generated but also reflect on their
desirability to people and society (Gümüsay & Reinecke, 2022). Few
studies (Rindova & Martins, 2022; Thompson & Byrne, 2022) have
focused on plausibility and desirability as crucial variables of future
scenarios generated through different future-making approaches,
because desirable futures might be challenging in terms of plausibility
and vice versa. Still, it is needed to explore in practice the differences
in plausibility and desirability of scenarios created through predictive and
imaginative future-making.
2.1
|
Predictive future-making
The predictive future-making approach is conceived through a process
that is predictive in the direction of future speculation, that is, from
the present into the future. Among the predictive future-making prac-
tices in organizations, corporate foresight is defined as the application
of futures and foresight practices to fulfil the organization's purpose
and achieve success (Gordon et al., 2020). In fact, the foresight pro-
cess follows three steps: observing what is happening in the present
(perceiving), projecting current drivers of change into the future (pro-
specting), and exploring to identify the most promising future scenario
(probing) (Rohrbeck & Kum, 2018). In the perceiving phase, organiza-
tions scan the business environment to identify future forces
(i.e., established drivers of change) and detect weak signals of change
(i.e., single events that could become established future forces)
(Rohrbeck et al., 2015). The data collected in this phase help
organizations gain competitive advantage by anticipating emerging
customer needs and technological shifts (Fergnani, 2022a). In the pro-
specting phase, organizations analyse the data gathered and derive
their implications for the organization by generating a set of future
scenarios through a variety of foresight techniques, such as scenario
planning (Schoemaker, 1995) and roadmaps (Carvalho et al., 2013). In
the probing phase, the organization translates the insights emerged
from the perceiving and prospecting phases into strategic actions,
such as reconfiguring internal resources or acquiring external ones
(Rohrbeck & Kum, 2018).
The evaluation of predictive future-making is based on the proba-
bility1 of occurrence of the drivers of change projected into the
future, such as the trends shaping the business environment in which
the organization currently operates (Wenzel et al., 2020). In fact, dif-
ferent future scenarios are constructed based on the different proba-
bility of occurrence of the drivers of change, useful to analyse their
“state uncertainty” (Vecchiato & Roveda, 2010). For example, quanti-
tative scenario planning approaches, such as trend impact analyses,
consist in evaluating the perceived probability of occurrence of the
drivers of change that shape a future scenario (Bradfield et al., 2005).
Instead, qualitative scenario planning methods, such as scenario
archetypes, consist in generating future scenarios in narrative form,
each characterized by the same probability of occurrence (Amer
et al., 2013).
The type of knowledge that characterizes predictive future-
making is concrete, as the horizon-scanning practices of corporate
foresight increase the learning capabilities of firms in terms of antici-
pation and adaptation to cope with uncertain futures (Marinkovic
et al., 2022). On the one hand, anticipation means identifying future
TABLE 1
Characteristics of predictive and imaginative future-making.
Characteristics (adapted
from Augustine
et al., 2019)
Predictive future-making
Key references
Imaginative
future-making
Key references
Conceptualization
Extrapolation based on current
future forces and signals of
change
Rohrbeck & Kum, 2018;
Rohrbeck et al., 2015;
Fergnani, 2022a
Imagination
based on
future values
Beckert, 2021; Rindova &
Martins, 2021; Whyte
et al., 2022; Bühring &
Liedtka, 2018; Tharp &
Tharp, 2022; Comi &
Whyte, 2018
Evaluation
Probability of current future
forces and signals of change
Wenzel et al., 2020; Vecchiato
& Roveda, 2010; Bradfield
et al., 2005; Amer
et al., 2013
Possibility of
future values
Rindova & Martins, 2021;
Dunne & Raby, 2013;
Polvora &
Nascimento, 2021; Merrie
et al., 2018; Candy &
Dunagan, 2017
Knowledge
Concreteness of current future
forces and signals of change
Marinkovic et al., 2022;
Vecchiato, 2012; Vecchiato
& Roveda, 2010
Ambiguity of
future
scenarios
Comi & Whyte, 2018; Bühring
& Bishop, 2020; Lehtonen
et al., 2022; Simeone &
D'Ippolito, 2022; Thompson
& Byrne, 2022
Temporal representation
Extend current future forces
and signals of change to the
future
Rindova & Martins, 2022;
Wenzel et al., 2020;
Flyverbom & Garsten, 2021
Reflect on future
values
Augustine et al., 2019;
Rindova & Martins, 2022;
Wenzel et al., 2020;
Flyverbom & Garsten, 2021
DURANTE ET AL.
3
 14678691, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/caim.12603 by <shibboleth>-member@chalmers.se, Wiley Online Library on [09/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
technological and social forces in advance in order to understand the
differences with current customer needs and exploit them to the
firm's advantage. In this vein, the “planning” school of corporate fore-
sight (Vecchiato, 2012) emphasizes the importance of enhancing man-
agers' ability to detect and recognize opportunities and threats in
advance and reconfigure the value chain. On the other hand, adapta-
tion means increasing the firm's flexibility to change its strategy by
responding quickly to signals of change as soon as they emerge. In this
stream, the “adaptive” school of corporate foresight (Vecchiato, 2012)
emphasizes the importance of enhancing managers' ability to respond
quickly to change. In this way, firms manage the “effect uncertainty”
of the drivers of change by either anticipating future forces or adapt-
ing to signals of change as soon as they emerge (Vecchiato &
Roveda, 2010).
The temporal representation of predictive future-making is
rooted in the continuation of current knowledge from the past and
present into the future (Rindova & Martins, 2022). This is based on
the assumption, typical of the period of “organized modernity”
(early 20th century to the 1970s), that the future can not only be
made but also be controlled through planning practices (Wenzel
et al., 2020). Thus, the projection of data about the past and the
present (e.g., statistics and narratives) is fundamental to extracting
actionable
insights
for
governing
the
future
(Flyverbom
&
Garsten, 2021).
2.2
|
Imaginative future-making
The imaginative future-making approach is conceived through a pro-
cess that is imaginative, as imagining (Beckert, 2021) the future begins
with
the
generation
of
fictional
future
options
(Rindova
&
Martins, 2021). In this stream, future-making is conceptualized as “a
form
of
inquiry”
that
is
reflective
and
participatory
(Whyte
et al., 2022). Among the emerging future-making practices aimed at
imagining futures, design-driven practices (Bühring & Liedtka, 2018;
Simeone & D'Ippolito, 2022) highlight the crucial role that design can
play in supporting organizational actors in proactively engaging in
future-making practices. For instance, discursive design is used as an
intellectual, communicative tool to stimulate debate about the future
(Dunne & Raby, 2013; Tharp & Tharp, 2022). To reflect on future sce-
narios not only at the individual level but also among a broader group
of stakeholders (Magistretti et al., 2023), organizations can follow two
steps: variation and selection (Rindova & Martins, 2021). In the varia-
tion phase, imaginaries of alternative future scenarios are generated
and made tangible through visual artefacts (e.g., sketches and draw-
ings) (Comi & Whyte, 2018). The materiality of visual artefacts makes
it possible to concretize the understanding of possible future scenar-
ios, translating tacit knowledge into explicit knowledge (e.g., aligning
participants with different backgrounds on possible available future
options) (Simeone & D'Ippolito, 2022). In the problem-solution match-
ing of the selection phase, actors collectively reflect on the available
future options (Rindova & Martins, 2021), while in the creative syn-
thesis of the selection phase, they negotiate and converge on the
values and beliefs that should characterize a shared possible future
scenario (Whyte et al., 2022).
The evaluation of imaginative future-making relies on the possi-
bility2
of
the
fictional
future
options
generated
(Rindova
&
Martins,
2021).
For
instance,
speculative
design
(Dunne
&
Raby, 2013) uses provocative artefacts to spark the imagination and
open up new possibilities to reflect on wicked problems and stimulate
debate about different ways of living. In this stream, design fiction
uses fictional objects to suspend preconceptions about the future
(Polvora & Nascimento, 2021), science fiction prototyping describes
future scenarios in a narrative fictional form (Merrie et al., 2018), and
experiential futures (Candy & Dunagan, 2017) recreate an immersive
environment that engages all the senses.
The type of knowledge that characterizes imaginative future-
making is ambiguous because it emerges iteratively from the interac-
tion of individuals with artefacts (Comi & Whyte, 2018). By applying
the aforementioned imaginative future-making practices, firms recog-
nize that employing planning methods in the right way is not always
adequate for addressing uncertain futures (Bühring & Bishop, 2020).
Thus, by reframing the wicked problems (Bellis et al., 2023; Pham
et al., 2023) that organizations are required to confront with
(Lehtonen et al., 2022), imaginative future-making practices align
stakeholders with different backgrounds around a shared vision of the
future, facilitating knowledge translation mechanisms (Simeone &
D'Ippolito, 2022). As a result, organizations enhance their experiential
learning
capabilities
to
thrive
in
uncertain
business
contexts
(Thompson & Byrne, 2022).
The temporal representation of imaginative future-making is
rooted in a leap from current knowledge (Augustine et al., 2019).
Indeed, the values and beliefs elicited in audiences by the strategic
narratives of future scenarios may be radically different from the
established cultural norms that individuals experience in the present
(Rindova & Martins, 2022). In this stream, fictional narratives that
embed anxieties and hopes promote speculation as a form of future
governance (Flyverbom & Garsten, 2021). This stems from the view
of the future as a “problematic temporal category” typical of “late
modernity” (from the 1980s), which is unknown and cannot be fully
controlled by planning practices alone (Wenzel et al., 2020).
2.3
|
Hypotheses development
Due to their different characteristics, the literature has considered
future scenarios generated by predictive and imaginative future-
making as inherently different (Augustine et al., 2019). Some studies
focus on plausibility and desirability as variables that characterize
future
scenarios
(Rindova
&
Martins,
2022;
Thompson
&
Byrne, 2022). Although a recent study (Rindova & Martins, 2022) has
focused on ways to resolve the tension between the plausibility and
desirability of future scenario generation, to our best knowledge, no
studies have examined in practice the levels of plausibility and desir-
ability of future scenarios generated by different future-making
approaches.
4
DURANTE ET AL.
 14678691, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/caim.12603 by <shibboleth>-member@chalmers.se, Wiley Online Library on [09/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
2.3.1
|
Differences between future-making
approaches in terms of future scenario plausibility
Predictive future-making practices are undertaken by organizations
with the aim of anticipating the future in order to respond in a timely
manner to changes in the business context and increase strategic pre-
paredness (Marinkovic et al., 2022). In fact, “extrapolating the value
chain” is fundamental to readapt the firm's existing resources and
capabilities to the driver of change, where “putting the driver first” is
crucial to innovate and gain a first-mover competitive advantage
(Vecchiato & Roveda, 2010, p. 1532). Therefore, it is important to
scan the business environment to identify the drivers of change and
generate alternative future scenarios in scenario planning activities.
Given the focus on prediction starting from horizon scanning, less
emphasis is placed on imagining unconventional and less probable
future possibilities (Derbyshire & Wright, 2017). In fact, emphasis is
placed on generating plausible future scenarios in scenario planning
methodologies (Amer et al., 2013). According to Rindova and Martins
(2022), the plausibility of a strategic narrative is higher the more the
future scenario is similar to reality and can be achieved in a continu-
ous way from the present to the future. Thus, plausibility is expected
to be higher in future scenarios generated by predictive future-making
practices.
H1. Plausibility is higher in future scenarios generated
by predictive future-making than by imaginative future-
making.
2.3.2
|
Differences between future-making
approaches in terms of future scenario desirability
Imaginative future-making practices are undertaken by firms and
other types of organizations, such as “future labs” (Gümüsay &
Reinecke, 2022), with the aim of imagining and reflecting on alterna-
tive futures. In fact, the role of imagination is crucial in aligning organi-
zational actors toward their desired future state (Beckert, 2021).
According to Rindova and Martins (2022), the desirability of a strate-
gic narrative is higher the more the future scenario embeds fictional
elements that stimulate reflection on values and are discontinuous
with current reality. By concretizing future representations through
visual form, participants can actively engage with the future and try to
shape their desirable version of it (Whyte et al., 2022). This stream
emphasizes the potential of design to support organizational actors in
imagining futures that are more desirable to people. Indeed, design
science has the potential to focus strategists' efforts on developing
innovative strategies that start not only from existing empirical reality
but also from “what could be” (Rindova & Martins, 2021). Design
practices,
such
as
prototyping
and
storytelling
(Bühring
&
Liedtka, 2018), have the potential to support the imagination of more
desirable
futures.
For
instance,
speculative
props
(Dunne
&
Raby, 2013) and design fictions (Lee, 2021) present provocative
glimpses of future scenarios, while experiential futures (Candy &
Dunagan, 2017) recreate immersive environments that engage the
five senses and make the future more tangible. Thus, desirability is
expected to be higher in future scenarios generated by imaginative
future-making practices.
H2. Desirability is higher in future scenarios generated
by imaginative future-making than by predictive future-
making.
2.3.3
|
Research model
Our research model is built on two hypotheses to explore the differ-
ences in plausibility and desirability of scenarios created through pre-
dictive and imaginative future-making. Figure 1 illustrates our model,
showing the dependent and independent variables and the two HP
previously presented.
3
|
METHODS
We designed an experiment to test our two hypotheses. The experi-
ment design followed the guidelines of Podsakoff and Podsakoff
(2019) and Harrison and List (2004). In particular, our study can be
classified as an experiment (Podsakoff & Podsakoff, 2019) given that
the independent variable (i.e., future-making approach) was manipu-
lated qualitatively (i.e., predictive and imaginative process) and that
participants were randomly assigned to the experimental conditions
(with only the firm they belonged to controlled as a confounding vari-
able). Furthermore, the experiment involved a nonstandard subject
pool (practitioners) (Harrison & List, 2004). The participants (male
42%, female 58%) were Italian practitioners working in the design unit
of a consultancy or design agency (48%) or in the innovation and stra-
tegic design unit of a product company (52%). Two months after the
experiment, we distributed a survey to assess the plausibility and
desirability of the future scenarios generated in the experiment. The
data collection yielded a total 227 future scenario evaluations.
The evaluators (male 57%, female 43%, 95% aged 25–64) were Italian
practitioners working in the design unit of a consultancy or design
agency (42%) or in the innovation and strategic design unit of a prod-
uct company (58%) mainly in the fields of strategy and marketing
(43%), design (37%), and information technology (11%). Table 2
reports the data collected in the experiment and postexperiment
survey.
3.1
|
Designing the experiment
We designed the experiment with the goal of operationalizing the
two future-making approaches (predictive and imaginative) based on
their characteristics (conception, evaluation, knowledge, and temporal
representation) identified as relevant dimensions in Augustine et al.'s
(2019) classification. On the one hand, the conceptualization of
DURANTE ET AL.
5
 14678691, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/caim.12603 by <shibboleth>-member@chalmers.se, Wiley Online Library on [09/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
predictive future-making occurs through a future-making process that
emphasizes the importance of scanning the environment as a starting
point to identify current future forces and signals of change to extrap-
olate future scenarios (Rohrbeck & Kum, 2018). Thus, the predictive
future-making cluster of participants received future forces and sig-
nals of change as inspirational input to generate a future scenario. On
the other hand, the conceptualization of the imaginative future-
making process emphasizes reflection (Whyte et al., 2022) and
imagination (Beckert, 2021) based on identifying fictional future
options (Rindova & Martins, 2021). Thus, the imaginative future-
making
cluster
of
participants
extracted
nonnegotiable
values
(e.g., those they personally believe must be present in the future sce-
nario) and up-for-discussion values (e.g., those whose presence in the
future scenario is left to team discussion) from provocative inspira-
tional videos about the future as inspirational input.
Whereas predictive future-making evaluates drivers of change
based on their probability of occurrence (Vecchiato & Roveda, 2010),
imaginative future-making evaluates fictional future options based on
their possibility (Rindova & Martins, 2022). Thus, participants in the
predictive future-making cluster were asked to evaluate the probabil-
ity of occurrence of future forces and signals of change, while partici-
pants in the imaginative future-making cluster were asked to evaluate
the relevance of nonnegotiable and up-for-discussion values.
Predictive future-making relies on concrete knowledge derived
from reality (Marinkovic et al., 2022), so participants in this cluster
were asked to start from current facts (e.g., future forces and signals
of change) to generate future scenarios. Imaginative future-making
instead relies on knowledge that is ambiguous because it emerges
from individuals' interactions with artefacts (Comi & Whyte, 2018), so
participants in this cluster were asked to rely on inspirational videos
as ambiguous artefacts representing fictional future scenarios.
Finally, as the temporal representation characterizing predictive
future-making is continuous (Rindova & Martins, 2022), participants in
the predictive future-making cluster were asked to extend a combina-
tion of current future forces and signals of change to generate the
future scenario. As imaginative futures entail a leap from current real-
ity into the future (Augustine et al., 2019), participants in the imagina-
tive
future-making
cluster
were
asked
to
reflect
on
future
nonnegotiable and up-for-discussion values extracted from inspira-
tional videos.
3.2
|
Organizing the experiment
The 4-h experiment was conducted virtually and involved 64 practi-
tioners randomly divided into 12 teams and equally divided into the
FIGURE 1
Research model.
TABLE 2
Data collection
Phase of the
study
Data collected
Purpose of data
collected
Experiment
•
12 complete Miro
boards, including
the templates used
by all 12 teams (64
practitioners from
21 companies)
•
12 complete future
scenarios, including
12 scenario
descriptions, 18
future forces, 18
signals of change,
18 nonnegotiable
values, 18 up-for-
discussion values,
38 scenario images,
61 keywords, 90
key topics
•
More than 19 h of
recordings of
teamworking
activities of all 12
teams
•
Analyse similarities
and differences
between future-
making approaches
in terms of
plausibility and
desirability of
future scenarios
generated
•
Ensure that all 12
teams followed the
instructions in
order to generate
the future
scenarios,
according to the
experiment cluster
(i.e., predictive or
imaginative)
Postexperiment
survey
•
223 future
scenarios
evaluations (113 of
scenarios generated
through predictive
and 110 generated
through imaginative
future-making)
•
Measure plausibility
and desirability of
future scenarios
generated
6
DURANTE ET AL.
 14678691, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/caim.12603 by <shibboleth>-member@chalmers.se, Wiley Online Library on [09/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
two predictive and imaginative clusters. Although the teams followed
different methodologies according to their cluster—predictive future-
making (Rohrbeck & Kum, 2018) and imaginative future-making
(Rindova & Martins, 2021)—each methodological substep of the pro-
cess was homogeneous in terms of the time range and the type of
tasks performed to ensure procedural equivalence in the experiment
(Podsakoff & Podsakoff, 2019).
Both clusters were given the same challenge as input, namely, to
make alternative futures of the food and beverage industry in 2030
from the perspective of a food corporation such as PepsiCo or Unile-
ver. The first task of the experiment was designed to operationalize
the perceiving phase of the predictive future-making process and the
variation phase of the imaginative future-making process. Partici-
pants in the predictive future-making cluster individually read the
future forces and signals of change and individually selected three of
each kind. Participants in the imaginative future-making cluster
autonomously watched provocative inspirational videos about alter-
native future scenarios of the food and beverage industry from which
they extracted nonnegotiable and up-for-discussion values. The sec-
ond task of the experiment resembled the prospecting phase of the
predictive future-making process and the problem-solution matching
of the selection phase of the imaginative future-making process. Each
group in the predictive future-making cluster converged on the selec-
tion of three future forces and three signals of change and voted on
their probability of occurrence on a 1–5 Likert-type scale. First, each
group identified the most-voted signals of change and future forces
and shared their understanding of those that were unclear. For
instance, a team clarified the meaning of the signal of change of
farming as a service (producing just what the demand is asking for),
providing an example (ordering boxes with fresh seasonal vegetables
at a farm). Second, following a team discussion, the team assigned a
probability of occurrence to each selected driver of change. For
instance, a team assigned a high probability of occurrence to the
weak signal of robotic kitchen, given that a participant heard that
Elon Musk would like to create automatic cooking assistants with
robotic arms.
Each group in the imaginative future-making cluster selected
three nonnegotiable values and three up-for-discussion values, and
voted on their relevance on a 1–5 Likert-type scale. First, participants
in each group explained to each other which nonnegotiable and up-
for-discussion values they individually extracted from the provocative
inspirational videos and why. For example, a participant extracted eat-
ing healthy, flavourful, and high-quality food as a nonnegotiable value,
given his need to avoid tomatoes grown in a greenhouse that have no
flavour. While another participant extracted vertical farming as an up-
for-discussion value, given the increasing pollution of cities. Second,
each group started a discussion to negotiate and converge on the final
nonnegotiable and up-for-discussion values and rate their relevance
on a 1–5 Likert-type scale. For example, a group agreed that people
would not be psychologically ready to become vegetarians in 2030,
thus assigning a low relevance to the up-to-discussion value of restric-
tion of meat consumption.
The third task of the experiment corresponded to the probing
phase of the predictive future-making process and the creative syn-
thesis of the selection phase of the imaginative future-making
process. All groups converged on a future scenario of the food and
beverage industry in 2030, providing a short description and associat-
ing it with an image produced by a generative AI tool (e.g., Dall-E and
Mesopotamia) through keyword insertion. Figure 2 reports a summary
of the phases of the experiment for both the predictive and imagina-
tive future-making cluster.
A total 12 future scenarios, one per team, were generated at the
end of the experiment. An example of a future scenario generated
through predictive future-making (P.1) and imaginative future-making
(I.1) respectively is reported in Figure 3, while the descriptions of all
the future scenarios generated are reported in the Appendix.
FIGURE 2
Phases of the experiment.
DURANTE ET AL.
7
 14678691, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/caim.12603 by <shibboleth>-member@chalmers.se, Wiley Online Library on [09/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
3.3
|
Measuring plausibility and desirability
Prior to commencing the measurement of future scenarios, our initial
step involved the thorough reading and coding of all 12 obtained sce-
narios. Following the axial coding process (Strauss & Corbin, 1990),
the authors independently coded the 12 future scenarios, aiming to
identify shared elements and the language employed to describe the
future. Subsequently, the authors performed a triangulation of
the findings to verify the validity of both the emerged themes and the
coded structure. This process has allowed us to conduct an initial
analysis of the 12 future scenarios that were generated and extract
qualitative insights from them. To obtain a balanced evaluation of the
future scenarios in terms of plausibility and desirability for each of
the 12 future scenarios generated, different versions of the survey
FIGURE 3
A future scenario generated through predictive future-making (P.1) and imaginative future-making (I.1). [Colour figure can be
viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
8
DURANTE ET AL.
 14678691, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/caim.12603 by <shibboleth>-member@chalmers.se, Wiley Online Library on [09/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
were evenly distributed among the respondents. Respondents' agree-
ment was measured using 12 items on a 7-point Likert-type scale
(1 = strongly disagree; 7 = strongly agree). Because we found no exist-
ing scale to measure the plausibility and desirability of future scenar-
ios, we built a scale based on the definitions of plausibility and
desirability derived from the literature. The six plausibility items were
constructed with reference to a range of future states that are the
result of a series of events that could occur according to our current
knowledge of physical laws, processes, and cause-effect relations
(Artusi & Bellini, 2022; Dunne & Raby, 2013; Voros, 2001; Wenzel
et al., 2020). Building on Peirce's view of desire (Hawkins, 2007;
Pape, 1997), and Zurlo et al.'s (2020) view of desirability as an act of
critique and a reaction to the status quo (Cuhls et al., 2022), the six
desirability items represent the degree to which the future scenario is
an expression of individuals' intentions and desires (Table 3).
We received 227 complete evaluations. After removing four that
were outliers according to Mahalanobis distance, the final dataset
counted 223 scenario evaluations (113 future scenarios generated
through predictive future-making, and 110 generated through imagi-
native future-making). To test the reliability of the scale, we per-
formed a principal component analysis on the 12 items using the
SPSS software, which confirmed the emergence of two components,
namely plausibility and desirability. Because the first and fifth items of
the plausibility component loaded on both the plausibility and desir-
ability components, they were discarded. Finally, we calculated Cron-
bach's alpha for plausibility (α = .73) and desirability (α = .92) to
check the internal consistency of the survey (Table 4).
4
|
RESULTS
In this section, we report on whether there are differences between
the future scenarios generated by predictive and imaginative future-
making in terms of plausibility and desirability. We present the results
of the qualitative and quantitative analysis of all the future scenarios
generated for both dependent variables.
4.1
|
Plausibility of future scenarios
In this section, we investigate whether plausibility is higher in future
scenarios generated by predictive future-making than those generated
by imaginative future-making.
TABLE 3
Plausibility and desirability items and references.
Items
References
Compared to reality as it is today, the future
scenario described above …
Plausibility
… can be reached through a believable series of
events
Voros, 2001
… is likely to happen because it is coherent with a
combination of current trends
… could happen according to our current
knowledge of physical laws, processes, causation
… represents one of the possible futures that could
happen
Dunne &
Raby, 2013
… can support in being prepared to face a future
that can likely happen
Wenzel
et al., 2020
… can represent a statistical prediction of the
future
Desirability
… represents a purpose that triggers my thoughts
and actions
Pape, 1997
… allows me to visualize an experience of the
world coherent with my desires
Hawkins, 2007
… represents a future that I could make my own
Zurlo
et al., 2020
… represents not only my desires but also the ones
of other individuals
… indicates a change that I consider necessary in
reaction to the status quo
Cuhls
et al., 2022
… represents a future that I would like to happen
TABLE 4
Principal component analysis loadings.
Items
Plausibility
Desirability
Compared to reality as it is today, the
future scenario described above …
… can be reached through a believable
series of events
… is likely to happen because it is
coherent with a combination of
current trends
.71
… could happen according to our
current knowledge of physical laws,
processes, causation
.61
… represents one of the possible
futures that could happen
.76
… can support in being prepared to face
a future that can likely happen
… can represent a statistical prediction
of the future
.75
… represents a purpose that triggers my
thoughts and actions
.75
… allows me to visualize an experience
of the world coherent with my
desires
.88
… represents a future that I could make
my own
.81
… represents not only my desires but
also the ones of other individuals
.81
… indicates a change that I consider
necessary in reaction to the status
quo
.76
… represents a future that I would like
to happen
.87
Cronbach's alpha
.73
.92
DURANTE ET AL.
9
 14678691, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/caim.12603 by <shibboleth>-member@chalmers.se, Wiley Online Library on [09/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
After conducting a qualitative analysis of the way in which the
future scenarios were written, we found no differences in terms of
verb tenses and jargon used, regardless of the process used to gener-
ate the scenarios. Interestingly, the simple future is the most used
tense in all scenario descriptions. This tense is used in English to make
predictions or state facts about the future. Thus, a scenario descrip-
tion composed of sentences using the simple future tense communi-
cates to the reader a sense of certainty on the fact that the described
situation will occur in the future. Similarly, the simple present tense is
used less frequently as a narrative device to tell the story of what
is happening in the scenario. Second, we found no differences in the
level of technological advancement of the future scenario descrip-
tions. In fact, all scenarios generated by the predictive and imaginative
future-making described a future in which technology enables food
production, distribution, and consumption in a pervasive way. The
production of synthetic food in the laboratory and the introduction of
new methods to produce less traditional food complement the reduc-
tion in natural meat consumption. The distribution of food throughout
the supply chain is transparent and tracked by new technologies.
Food consumption is controlled by customers who are able to check
the nutritional composition of food through smart devices. Table 5
provides examples of scenario descriptions generated by predictive
and imaginative future-making, both in terms of verb tenses and levels
of technological advancement.
We conducted a multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA)
using SPSS software to evaluate whether there was a statistically sig-
nificant difference between the average values of plausibility of the
future scenarios generated by predictive and imaginative future-
making (F value (2,220) = 9.46, p < .001, Wilk's Λ = .92, partial
η2 = .08). The results show that there are no statistically significant
differences in average plausibility between the scenarios generated by
predictive future-making and those generated by imaginative future-
making (F value (1,221) = 1.00, p = .318). In fact, the scenarios gener-
ated by predictive future-making (M = 4.94; SD = 0.94) had a similar
average plausibility to those generated by imaginative future-making
(M = 5.07; SD = 0.97) (Figure 4). This means that future scenarios do
not differ significantly in terms of plausibility, regardless of the future-
making approach used. Therefore, H1 is rejected.
4.2
|
Desirability of future scenarios
In this section, we investigate whether the desirability of future sce-
narios generated by imaginative future-making is higher than that of
predictive future-making.
On the one hand, the qualitative analysis of the scenario descrip-
tions generated by predictive future-making highlights two recurring
themes. The first theme highlights a future scenario characterized by
a sense of threat and constraint caused by a business context that has
become difficult to navigate due to the impact of future environmen-
tal forces such as climate change and world overpopulation. The sec-
ond theme describes a future in which the unsustainable behaviours
of the past, such as excessive food waste and exploitation of scarce
resources, must be curtailed in order to reduce the environmental
impact of the food supply chain. On the other hand, the qualitative
analysis of the scenario descriptions generated by imaginative futures
highlights five recurring themes. The first theme describes a future
TABLE 5
Verb tenses and technological advancement of
predictive and imaginative future-making scenario descriptions.
Predictive
future-making
Imaginative
future-making
Verb tenses and
jargon
Scenario 1: “In 2030,
people will be able
to verify the origin
and quality of a
product before
buying it.”
Scenario 3: “To
maximize cost, land,
and resource
efficiency for food
production, a
breakthrough in
synthetic food
production is
needed.”
Scenario 5: “Some
vegetables for
“sporadic” or
“immediate”
consumption, such
as herbs, will be
more available at
home compared to
retailers.”
Scenario 1: “People
will create small and
self-sustaining
communities to
restore vegetation
and marine life.”
Scenario 4: “In 2030,
Matilda will be
13 years old and
will live in a world
characterized by
centralized and
rationed water
management […].”
Scenario 5: “Large
companies will
carefully measure
their impact on the
environment in
order to remain
competitive and
strong in the
marketplace.”
Level of
technological
advancement
Scenario 1: “In homes
instead, people will
be able to create
their own delicious
synthetic meal using
a food robot.”
Scenario 2: “To
reduce significant
food and resource
waste, new
technologies, such as
indoor farming,
synthetic food
production, and 3D
printing will be
developed.”
Scenario 5: “Emerging
technologies, such as
blockchain and Web
3.0, will make it
possible to track the
entire food supply
chain, ensuring
product quality and
sustainability, with
the highest level of
transparency for
consumers.”
Scenario 2: “There will
be a debate focused
on the search for
new and real
production solutions
(no greenwashing)
related to the
creation of food in
the laboratory (e.g.,
lab-grown meat) as
a possible solution.”
Scenario 3: “In 2030,
there will be more
autonomy in
sourcing or creating
food at home
through new
technologies that
allow consumers to
be autonomous and
independent.”
Scenario 5: “In
addition, incentive
policies will ensure
the development of
new technologies in
the environment
and food sectors.”
10
DURANTE ET AL.
 14678691, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/caim.12603 by <shibboleth>-member@chalmers.se, Wiley Online Library on [09/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
scenario in which societies have drastically changed the way they
organize themselves, restoring traditional food production and con-
sumption such as local fishing and cultural food rituals. The second
and third themes describe a society in which respect for the environ-
ment is a core value and in which nutrition education plays a crucial
role from an early age. Finally, the last two themes highlight the
importance of working at a collective level to mitigate climate change
through policy-making and fostering stakeholder collaboration and
dialogue on possible solutions (see Appendix A for a list of the key
themes that characterize each future scenario).
Thus, the descriptions of the scenarios generated by predictive
future-making differ in several ways from those generated by imagina-
tive future-making. First, compared to the descriptions of scenarios
generated by predictive future-making, the descriptions of imaginative
future-making focus on the interaction between actors (e.g., local
communities and policymakers), transcending the individual and firm
levels. Second, the imaginative future-making scenario descriptions
depict a future in which collective debate and action take place to
proactively anticipate and manage climate change, rather than pas-
sively react after climate change has occurred. In fact, education about
the food supply chain and environmental ecosystems plays a critical
role in mitigating climate change (Table 6). Thus, the scenario descrip-
tions generated by predictive futures represent a diagnostic attitude
to temporal events, aimed at identifying the underlying causes of the
problem, while those generated by imaginative futures are prognostic,
aimed at identifying and implementing solutions.
The results also show that there are statistically significant
differences in average desirability between the scenarios generated
by predictive future-making and those generated by imaginative
future-making (F value (1,221) = 16.19, p < .001, partial η2 = .07). In
particular, average desirability is higher for future scenarios generated
by imaginative future-making (M = 4.90; SD = 1.31) than for future
scenarios
generated
by
predictive
future-making
(M = 4.17;
SD = 1.39) (Figure 5). This means that future scenarios significantly
differ in terms of desirability based on the future-making approach
used. Thus, H2 is supported.
FIGURE 4
Comparing the future-
making approaches: plausibility. [Colour
figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.
com]
TABLE 6
Benefiting actors and attitude to temporal events of the
predictive and imaginative future-making scenario descriptions.
Predictive fut
ure-making
Imaginative
future-making
Benefiting
actors
Scenario 1: “In 2030,
people will be able to
verify the origin and
quality of a product
before buying it.”
Scenario 3: “As
customers become
increasingly aware of
the production chain
and processes that
deliver food ‘to their
table’, awareness of
the origin of the food
and the sustainability
of the production
process will become
the main determinant
of choice.”
Scenario 3: “Small local
communities will
coexist with
corporations whose
environmental impact
will be regulated by
the government.”
Scenario 5: “The most
virtuous nations
collaborate and share
experiences,
expertise and
technologies by
creating a database
of use cases with the
results obtained.”
Attitude to
temporal
events
Scenario 2: “Imagine a
world in which the
scarcity of resources
and the effects of
climate change are
widely recognized by
the year 2030.”
Scenario 3: “It will be
critical to leverage
IoT and big data to
make the best use of
limited resources for
agriculture, which
must be used as
efficiently as possible
due to resource
scarcity, climate
change, and
overpopulation of the
globe.”
Scenario 1: “Imagine a
world in which,
through the
participation of
stakeholders, people
can take action.”
Scenario 5: “The
cultural change
started in schools
where food and
respect for the
environment have
become a subject
that teaches how to
eat right and respect
local ecosystems.”
DURANTE ET AL.
11
 14678691, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/caim.12603 by <shibboleth>-member@chalmers.se, Wiley Online Library on [09/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
5
|
DISCUSSION
The experiment provides insights into the relationship between pre-
dictive and imaginative future-making and the plausibility and desir-
ability of the scenarios generated. In particular, our study contributes
to the underexplored field of empirical studies on future-making by
disentangling how two dichotomous approaches to future-making
generate scenarios that differ in terms of plausibility and desirability.
Specifically, our findings (i) frame the differences and similarities of
predictive and imaginative future-making approaches (Augustine
et al., 2019), showing that the resulting future scenarios of the two
approaches are not inherently different because they also share simi-
larities and (ii) respond to calls urging scholars to stimulate methodo-
logical advances in the empirical study of future-making (Gümüsay &
Reinecke, 2022) by proposing a dichotomous approach (i.e., predictive
and imaginative), reinforcing that desirability is not considered a fan-
tasy (Augustine et al., 2019) but an individual and organizational aspi-
ration (Gümüsay & Reinecke, 2022) and a crucial dimension to
consider in the future-making process.
We next discuss the main contributions of our study. First, by
exploring the differences in terms of the plausibility and desirability of
scenarios created by predictive and imaginative future-making, we
contribute to the debate by examining in practice an understudied
organizational phenomenon, namely, future-making (Wenzel, 2022;
Wenzel et al., 2020). Indeed, through our experiment (Harrison &
List, 2004; Podsakoff & Podsakoff, 2019), we were able to test how
two types of future-making differ in terms of the plausibility and
desirability of future scenario generation, discussing how organiza-
tions “actually and ideally engage with the future” (Fergnani, 2022b,
p. 8). Furthermore, given the challenges that organizations face in bal-
ancing reality and imagination when looking at the future (Rindova &
Martins, 2022; Thompson & Byrne, 2022), these findings inform
scholars about how future-making approaches differ in terms of the
plausibility and desirability of future scenario generation. In addition,
our
study
explores
the
potential
of
not
only
predictive
(Fergnani, 2022b) but also imaginative future-making to support orga-
nizational actors in future-making (Gümüsay & Reinecke, 2022;
Rindova & Martins, 2022; Wenzel et al., 2020). Given the recent inter-
est
in
the
role
of
imagination
in
future-making
practices
(Beckert, 2021), scholars propose theoretical processes (Rindova &
Martins, 2021) that leave ample space for experimentation in practice.
Thus, our empirical study sheds light on the actual application and
performance of an imaginative future-making process (Rindova &
Martins, 2021). Second, our study responds to the call to investigate
future-making approaches in practice (Gümüsay & Reinecke, 2022). In
fact, by involving practitioners, we reveal how an experiment
(Podsakoff & Podsakoff, 2019) on future-making approaches can help
investigate different aspects (e.g., triggers, processes, and interactions)
(Gümüsay & Reinecke, 2022) of future-making research and mitigate
the drawbacks of traditional laboratory experiments involving stu-
dents (Podsakoff & Podsakoff, 2019).
5.1
|
Theoretical implications
Our study has implications for advancing the theoretical understand-
ing of future-making studies (Wenzel, 2022). Indeed, to our knowl-
edge, this study is one of the first (Thompson & Byrne, 2022) to
empirically test the relationship between future-making approaches
and the scenarios generated. One of the most important implications
of our experiment is that the future-making approach used does not
affect the plausibility of the scenario created but does affect its desir-
ability. Previous research has considered future scenarios generated
by predictive and imaginative future-making as inherently different
(Augustine et al., 2019). Our study advances theoretical understanding
that scenarios are influenced in their outcomes by the future-making
approach
adopted.
By
framing
two
different
theoretical
perspectives—predictive future-making (Fergnani, 2022a; Marinkovic
et al., 2022; Vecchiato, 2012) versus imaginative future-making
(Beckert, 2021; Simeone & D'Ippolito, 2022; Tharp & Tharp, 2022),
FIGURE 5
Comparing predictive and
imaginative future-making: desirability.
[Colour figure can be viewed at
wileyonlinelibrary.com]
12
DURANTE ET AL.
 14678691, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/caim.12603 by <shibboleth>-member@chalmers.se, Wiley Online Library on [09/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
we compared the important phases of both approaches and experi-
mented their impact in terms of plausibility and desirability of future
scenarios generated. In fact, we compared a predictive future-making
process
(Rohrbeck
&
Kum,
2018)
and
the
tools
involved
(e.g., horizon scanning) with an imaginative future-making process
(Rindova & Martins, 2021) and the tools adopted (e.g., designed arte-
facts).
This
enriches
the
current
debate
on
future-making
(Fergnani, 2022b; Wenzel, 2022), contributing in practice to the theo-
retical debate on the essence and value of future-making (Gümüsay &
Reinecke, 2022).
In addition, our research contributes to the academic debate on
future-making by proposing a potentially replicable way to conduct
empirical studies (Gümüsay & Reinecke, 2022) on future-making. As
future-making research tends to be more theoretical and conceptual
(Rindova & Martins, 2021), our study contributes by proposing a tan-
gible and empirical way to test constructs and relationships in future-
making endeavours. The experiment we designed and conducted
informs on the relevance of considering plausibility and desirability as
key constructs in future-making scenario generation.
5.2
|
Managerial implications
In terms of managerial implications, our study reveals to practitioners
the characteristics and potentialities of adopting different future-
making approaches in terms of the plausibility and desirability of
future scenario generation from an organizational perspective. In fact,
it exemplifies predictive and imaginative future-making by distinguish-
ing between input, process, and output. In particular, it shows man-
agers that different predictive (future forces and signals of change)
and imaginative (nonnegotiable and debatable values) inputs shape
different future-making processes. While predictive future-making
processes and tools (e.g., scenario planning) are established ways
adopted by organizations to increase future preparedness, imaginative
ones (e.g., the use of designed artefacts) are less known and aim at
sparking reflection on the future. Thus, by comparing two different
future-making approaches, we underline the existence of less conven-
tional future-making practices, such as imaginative ones. In fact, we
inform practitioners of the potential of imaginative future-making in
designing futures that are more desirable to people, highlighting that
not only prediction is relevant but also reflection and imagination of
what might be the future is crucial. Indeed, the research shows to
managers the power of imaginative future-making that is rooted in
envisioning and crafting scenarios that are not only plausible but also
desirable. This is achieved through a series of design activities wherein
various stakeholders are engaged to reflect on and debate over possi-
bilities, rather than solely predicting them. Finally, our study informs
practitioners about how to manage future-making processes by show-
ing that different approaches differently affect the properties of the
future scenarios generated. Therefore, our study supports practi-
tioners in managing complexity by unpacking the future-making
approaches in terms of the resulting scenarios generated.
6
|
CONCLUSIONS, LIMITATIONS AND
FUTURE RESEARCH AVENUES
We conducted an experiment (Podsakoff & Podsakoff, 2019) to exam-
ine the differences in the plausibility and desirability of scenarios cre-
ated
by
predictive
and
imaginative
future-making.
Our
study
contributes to theory (Augustine et al., 2019) by first providing a more
nuanced understanding of the differences between the desirability of
predictive (Rohrbeck & Kum, 2018; Vecchiato, 2012) and imaginative
future-making
scenarios
(Rindova
&
Martins,
2021;
Tharp
&
Tharp, 2022), suggesting that while the future-making approaches dif-
fer in terms of desirability, they are similar in terms of plausibility. Sec-
ond, by conducting an empirical study, we highlight desirability as a
crucial dimension to consider in future-making while stimulating
methodological advances in how to study future-making (Gümüsay &
Reinecke, 2022). Finally, our study helps practitioners identify the
potentials of adopting different future-making approaches in terms of
the inputs, processes, tools, and performance of future scenario gen-
eration. First, we reinforce to practitioners the potential of imagina-
tive future-making in generating futures desirable to people. Second,
we inform practitioners that not only predictive but also imaginative
future-making can support practitioners in generating plausible future
scenarios.
Despite the theoretical and practical contributions, the experi-
mental setting and the nationality of participants may be a limitation
of the study. Thus, further research could focus on exploring future-
making in a less controlled environment and involving international
participants. Given the use of generative AI tools to support the sce-
nario generation phase of the experiment, future research could focus
on their role in influencing the plausibility and desirability of future
scenario generation.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research is part of the HumanTech Project, which is supported
by the Italian Ministry of University and Research (MUR) for the
2023-2027 period as part of the ministerial initiative “Departments of
Excellence” (L. 232/2016).
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the
corresponding author upon reasonable request.
ORCID
Ilaria Durante
https://orcid.org/0009-0007-3836-3965
Claudio Dell'Era
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4930-2208
Stefano Magistretti
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9968-7030
Cristina Tu Anh Pham
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1639-4142
ENDNOTES
1 Probability consists in recognizing existing alternatives emerging from
the past and present, namely “what is” (Rindova & Martins, 2021,
p. 801).
DURANTE ET AL.
13
 14678691, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/caim.12603 by <shibboleth>-member@chalmers.se, Wiley Online Library on [09/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
2 Possibility consists in imagining future options, namely “what could be”,
thus
enlarging
the
range
of
existing
alternatives
(Rindova
&
Martins, 2021, p. 801).
REFERENCES
Amer, M., Daim, T. U., & Jetter, A. (2013). A review of scenario planning.
Futures, 46, 23–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.futures.2012.10.003
Artusi, F., & Bellini, E. (2022). From vision to innovation: New service
development through front-line employee engagement. Innovations,
24(3), 433–458. https://doi.org/10.1080/14479338.2021.1979986
Augustine, G., Soderstrom, S., Milner, D., & Weber, K. (2019). Constructing
a distant future: Imaginaries in geoengineering. Academy of Manage-
ment Journal, 62(6), 1930–1960. https://doi.org/10.5465/amj.2018.
0059
Beckert, J. (2021). The firm as an engine of imagination: Organizational
prospection and the making of economic futures. Organization Theory,
2,
263178772110057.
https://doi.org/10.1177/
26317877211005773
Bellis, P., Magnanini, S., & Verganti, R. (2023). Dialogue for strategy imple-
mentation: How framing processes enable the evolution of new
opportunities. Journal of Knowledge Management. https://doi.org/10.
1108/JKM-01-2023-0064
Bradfield, R., Wright, G., Burt, G., Cairns, G., & Van Der Heijden, K. (2005).
The origins and evolution of scenario techniques in long range busi-
ness planning. Futures, 37(8), 795–812. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
futures.2005.01.003
Bühring, J., & Bishop, P. C. (2020). Foresight and design: New support for
strategic decision making. She Ji: the Journal of Design, Economics, and
Innovation,
6(3),
408–432.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sheji.2020.
07.002
Bühring, J., & Liedtka, J. (2018). Embracing systematic futures thinking at
the intersection of strategic planning, foresight and design. Journal of
Innovation Management, 6(3), 134–152. https://doi.org/10.24840/
2183-0606_006-003_0006
Candy, S., & Dunagan, J. (2017). Designing an experiential scenario: The
people who vanished. Futures, 86, 136–153. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.futures.2016.05.006
Carvalho, M. M., Fleury, A., & Lopes, A. P. (2013). An overview of the liter-
ature on technology roadmapping (TRM): Contributions and trends.
Technological
Forecasting
and
Social
Change,
80(7),
1418–1437.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2012.11.008
Comi, A., & Whyte, J. (2018). Future making and visual artefacts: An eth-
nographic study of a design project. Organization Studies, 39(8), 1055–
1083. https://doi.org/10.1177/0170840617717094
Cuhls, K., Dragomir, B., Gheorghiu, R., Rosa, A., & Curaj, A. (2022). Proba-
bility and desirability of future developments—Results of a large-scale
Argumentative Delphi in support of Horizon Europe preparation.
Futures, 138, 102918. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.futures.2022.102918
Derbyshire, J., & Wright, G. (2017). Augmenting the intuitive logics sce-
nario planning method for a more comprehensive analysis of causa-
tion. International Journal of Forecasting, 33(1), 254–266. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ijforecast.2016.01.004
Dunne, A., & Raby, F. (2013). Speculative everything: Design, fiction, and
social dreaming. MIT Press.
Fergnani, A. (2022a). Corporate foresight: A new frontier for strategy and
management. Academy of Management Perspectives, 36(2), 820–844.
https://doi.org/10.5465/amp.2018.0178
Fergnani, A. (2022b). Corporate foresight: Real or ideal? Academy of Man-
agement Perspectives, 36(2), 851–856. https://doi.org/10.5465/amp.
2021.0049
Flyverbom, M., & Garsten, C. (2021). Anticipation and organization: Seeing,
knowing
and
governing
futures.
Organization
Theory,
2,
263178772110203. https://doi.org/10.1177/26317877211020325
Furnari, S. (2018). When does an issue trigger change in a field? A compar-
ative approach to issue frames, field structures and types of field
change. Human Relations, 71(3), 321–348. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0018726717726861
Gordon, A. V., Ramic, M., Rohrbeck, R., & Spaniol, M. J. (2020). 50 years of
corporate and organizational foresight: Looking back and going for-
ward. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 154, 119966.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2020.119966
Gümüsay, A. A., & Reinecke, J. (2022). Researching for desirable futures:
From real utopias to imagining alternatives. Journal of Management
Studies, 59(1), 236–242. https://doi.org/10.1111/joms.12709
Harrison, G. W., & List, J. A. (2004). Field experiments. Journal of Economic
Literature,
42(4),
1009–1055.
https://doi.org/10.1257/
0022051043004577
Hawkins, S. B. (2007). Desire and natural classification: Aristotle and
Peirce on final cause. Transactions of the Charles S. Peirce Society, 43(3),
521–541.
Hölzle, K., Björk, J., Boer, H., & Goduscheit, R. C. (2022). The future is well
hidden—It is to us to uncover it. Creativity and Innovation Management,
31(1), 3–4. https://doi.org/10.1111/caim.12487
Lee, T. (2021). Beyond archetypes: Advancing the knowledge of narrative
fiction in future scenarios. Futures, 132, 102779. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.futures.2021.102779
Lehtonen, M. J., Yeow, P., & Chew, J. (2022). Empowering change for
future-making:
Developing
agency by framing wicked
problems
through design. Futures, 139, 102952. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
futures.2022.102952
Magistretti, S., Dell'Era, C., Cautela, C., & Kotlar, J. (2023). Design
thinking for organizational innovation at PepsiCo. California Manage-
ment
Review,
65,
5–26.
https://doi.org/10.1177/00081256231
170421
Marinkovic, M., Al-Tabbaa, O., Khan, Z., & Wu, J. (2022). Corporate fore-
sight: A systematic literature review and future research trajectories.
Journal of Business Research, 144, 289–311. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jbusres.2022.01.097
Merrie, A., Keys, P., Metian, M., & Österblom, H. (2018). Radical Ocean
futures-scenario
development
using
science
fiction
prototyping.
Futures, 95, 22–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.futures.2017.09.005
Pape, H. (1997). Love's power and the causality of mind: C. S. Peirce on
the place of mind and culture in evolution. Transactions of the Charles
S. Peirce Society, 33(1), 59–90.
Pham, C. T. A., Magistretti, S., & Dell'Era, C. (2023). How do you frame ill-
defined problems? A study on creative logics in action. Creativity and
Innovation Management, 32(3), 493–516. https://doi.org/10.1111/
caim.12543
Podsakoff, P. M., & Podsakoff, N. P. (2019). Experimental designs in man-
agement and leadership research: Strengths, limitations, and recom-
mendations for improving publishability. The Leadership Quarterly,
30(1), 11–33. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2018.11.002
Polvora, A., & Nascimento, S. (2021). Foresight and design fictions meet
at a policy lab: An experimentation approach in public sector innova-
tion. Futures, 128, 102709. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.futures.2021.
102709
Rindova, V. P., & Martins, L. L. (2021). Shaping possibilities: A design sci-
ence approach to developing novel strategies. Academy of Manage-
ment Review, 46, 800–822. https://doi.org/10.5465/amr.2019.0289
Rindova, V. P., & Martins, L. L. (2022). Futurescapes: Imagination and tem-
poral reorganization in the design of strategic narratives. Strategic
Organization,
20(1),
200–224.
https://doi.org/10.1177/
1476127021989787
Rohrbeck, R., & Kum, M. E. (2018). Corporate foresight and its impact on
firm performance: A longitudinal analysis. Technological Forecasting
and Social Change, 129, 105–116. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.
2017.12.013
14
DURANTE ET AL.
 14678691, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/caim.12603 by <shibboleth>-member@chalmers.se, Wiley Online Library on [09/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Rohrbeck, R., Thom, N., & Arnold, H. (2015). IT tools for foresight:
The
integrated
insight
and
response
system
of
Deutsche
Telekom Innovation Laboratories. Technological Forecasting and Social
Change,
97,
115–126.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2013.
09.015
Schmidt, S., & Brinks, V. (2017). Open creative labs: Spatial settings at the
intersection of communities and organizations. Creativity and Innova-
tion
Management,
26(3),
291–299.
https://doi.org/10.1111/caim.
12220
Schoemaker, P. J. H. (1995). Scenario planning: A tool for strategic think-
ing. MIT Sloan Management Review, https://sloanreview.mit.edu/
article/scenario-planning-a-tool-for-strategic-thinking/
Simeone, L., & D'Ippolito, B. (2022). The potential of design-driven fore-
sight to support strategy articulation through experiential learning.
Long Range Planning, 55(6), 102181. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lrp.
2021.102181
Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1990). Basics of qualitative research. Sage
Publications.
Tharp, B. M., & Tharp, S. M. (2022). Discursive design. Critical, speculative,
and alternative things. MIT Press.
Thompson, N. A., & Byrne, O. (2022). Imagining futures: Theorizing the
practical knowledge of future-making. Organization Studies, 43(2),
247–268. https://doi.org/10.1177/01708406211053222
Vecchiato, R. (2012). Environmental uncertainty, foresight and strategic
decision making: An integrated study. Technological Forecasting and
Social Change, 79(3), 436–447. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.
2011.07.010
Vecchiato, R., & Roveda, C. (2010). Strategic foresight in corporate organi-
zations: Handling the effect and response uncertainty of technology
and social drivers of change. Technological Forecasting and Social
Change, 77(9), 1527–1539. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2009.
12.003
Vettorello, M., Eisenbart, B., & Ranscombe, C. (2022). The Innovation Sys-
tem Roadmap: A novel approach to instil futures-oriented reasoning in
strategic decision making. Creativity and Innovation Management, 31(1),
5–18. https://doi.org/10.1111/caim.12472
Voros, J. (2001). A primer on futures studies, foresight and the use of sce-
narios. Prospect: The Foresight Bulletin, 6(1), 1–8.
Wenzel,
M.
(2022).
Taking
the
future
more
seriously:
From
corporate foresight to “future-making”. Academy of Management
Perspectives,
36(2),
845–850.
https://doi.org/10.5465/amp.2020.
0126
Wenzel, M., Krämer, H., Koch, J., & Reckwitz, A. (2020). Future and organi-
zation studies: On the rediscovery of a problematic temporal category
in organizations. Organization Studies, 41(10), 1441–1455. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0170840620912977
Whyte, J., Comi, A., & Mosca, L. (2022). Making futures that matter:
Future making, online working and organizing remotely. Organization
Theory, 3, 263178772110691. https://doi.org/10.1177/26317877
211069138
Zurlo, F., Maurer, D., & Pei, X. (2020). Home Bridges the World. Promising
domestic scenarios in response to the Covid crisis. Creative Industries
lab, Politecnico di Milano.
AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES
Ilaria Durante is a PhD candidate and researcher of the LEADIN'
Lab, the Laboratory of LEAdership, Design and INnovation of the
School of Management, Politecnico di Milano. She is also Senior
Researcher at the Observatories “FUTURES.
Claudio Dell'Era is a professor of Design Thinking for Business at
the School of Management, Politecnico di Milano, where he
serves also as a co-founder of LEADIN' Lab, the Laboratory of
LEAdership, Design and INnovation. He is also the director of the
Observatories “Design Thinking for Business” and “FUTURES.
Stefano Magistretti is an assistant professor in agile innovation
and design management at the School of Management, Politec-
nico di Milano. He also holds a senior research position in the
LEADIN' Lab, the Laboratory of Leadership, Design, and Innova-
tion. Within the School of Management, he serves as the co-direc-
tor for the Observatory Design Thinking for Business and
Futures: Sense Making by System Thinking. His research is situ-
ated at the intersection of design thinking and digital technolo-
gies, with a focus on the expanding role of design and design
thinking in entrepreneurship and strategy.
Cristina Tu Anh Pham holds a PhD in Management Engineering,
with a research focus on problem framing, creativity, and innova-
tion. She currently serves as a Lecturer of Design Thinking, Design
Sprint Execution, and Innovation of Meaning at Polimi-Graduate
School of Management. Additionally, she holds the position of
Senior Researcher at the LEADIN' Lab, the Laboratory of LEAder-
ship, Design, and Innovation, and she is a member of the Senior
Research team of the Observatory Design Thinking for Business.
Cristina has contributed to various academic journals, including
Industrial Marketing Management, Innovation: Organization &
Management,
Creativity
and
Innovation
Management,
and
Research-Technology Management.
How to cite this article: Durante, I., Dell'Era, C., Magistretti, S.,
& Pham, C. T. A. (2024). Predictive or imaginative futures?
Experimenting with alternative future-making approaches.
Creativity and Innovation Management, 1–22. https://doi.org/
10.1111/caim.12603
DURANTE ET AL.
15
 14678691, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/caim.12603 by <shibboleth>-member@chalmers.se, Wiley Online Library on [09/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
APPENDIX A
16
DURANTE ET AL.
 14678691, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/caim.12603 by <shibboleth>-member@chalmers.se, Wiley Online Library on [09/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
DURANTE ET AL.
17
 14678691, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/caim.12603 by <shibboleth>-member@chalmers.se, Wiley Online Library on [09/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
18
DURANTE ET AL.
 14678691, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/caim.12603 by <shibboleth>-member@chalmers.se, Wiley Online Library on [09/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
DURANTE ET AL.
19
 14678691, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/caim.12603 by <shibboleth>-member@chalmers.se, Wiley Online Library on [09/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
20
DURANTE ET AL.
 14678691, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/caim.12603 by <shibboleth>-member@chalmers.se, Wiley Online Library on [09/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
DURANTE ET AL.
21
 14678691, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/caim.12603 by <shibboleth>-member@chalmers.se, Wiley Online Library on [09/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
22
DURANTE ET AL.
 14678691, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/caim.12603 by <shibboleth>-member@chalmers.se, Wiley Online Library on [09/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
