Public Interest Technology and the Design for 
Next-Generation Personal Mobility in Indian 
Megacities 
 
Vivek Kant, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Angshuman Das, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, and 
Sugandh Malhotra, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay 
 
 
Abstract—The aim of the article is to present a structured design 
analysis for the requirements of next-generation personal 
mobility and vehicle design in Indian megacities. Next-generation 
personal mobility design as a public interest technological system 
in a city such as Mumbai requires careful consideration of the 
trends shaping the everyday activity of Mumbaikars. This paper 
uses a speculative design approach of scenario planning to 
develop scenarios of future personal mobility and vehicle design 
in 2035-2040. It further uses expert judgments for the validity of 
scenarios as well as selects a particular scenario for future 
development based on expert ratings based on preferability, 
probability, possibility, and plausibility of occurrence. The 
selected scenario was broadened and refined further in terms of 
its sub-themes to serve as the basis of design. This selected 
scenario will serve as the basis of design ideations and iterative 
prototypes to develop a form for next-generation personal 
mobility for 2035-2040. 
 
Index Terms—Speculative design, Mobility, India, Public Interest 
Technology 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Mobility Indian megacities, such as Mumbai, presents a 
unique human-centered design problem for public-interest 
sociotechnical systems. First, India is characterized under the 
medium-human development index category in the United 
Nations Development Index. This means that many people lie 
at the base of the economic pyramid, even though there is a 
small percentage of Indians at the apex of the pyramid. 
Despite the economic range that Indians fall into, everyone 
travels for their day-to-day activities, making urban mobility a 
major challenge for human-centered designers in India. 
Second, India as a nation is undergoing a massive wave of 
urbanization due to internal migration towards the mega-cities, 
such as Mumbai, resulting in an increase in human density in 
concentrated regions. As a result, there is a growing need for 
mobility systems in cities for rapid urban transit. These 
 
Vivek Kant’s work was supported in part by a start-up grant from Indian 
Institute of Technology Kanpur. 
Vivek Kant (ORCID: 0000-0002-3003-4098) is with the Department of 
Design, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur, India (e-mail: 
vkant@ iitk.ac.in). 
Angshuman Das was with the IDC School of Design, Indian Institute of 
Technology Bombay, Mumbai, India. He is now an independent scholar (e- 
mail: angshu3101@gmail.com). 
Sugandh Malhotra is with the IDC School of Design, Indian Institute of 
Technology Bombay, Mumbai, India. (e-mail: sugandh@iitb.ac.in). 
mobility systems imply not only mass-rapid transit but also 
personal mobility. Our key emphasis derives from the newly 
developed direction of Public Interest Technology (PIT) which 
is defined as ‘the application of design, data, and delivery to 
advance the public interest and promote the public good in the 
digital age” [1]. The emphasis is to promote the public good 
and advance public interests with the application of human- 
centred design, deployment, and technological expertise [1]- 
[4]. 
Our key research question is how we can envision personal 
mobility in Indian megacities in a horizon of 15-20 years from 
now if we use a human-centred design approach towards 
envisioning the future of mobility with a view towards public- 
interest technology. In this regard, the contribution of this 
paper is two-fold. First, it presents a futures-oriented design 
methodology for comprehending forms of future technologies 
informed by the PIT viewpoint. Second, it provides a view 
toward alternative human-centered solutions to specific issues 
in sociotechnical design. PIT technologies [1]-[4] promotes 
an egalitarian view towards human-centred technology design. 
This enables thinking about technology not only in terms of 
the actual engineering and design but also comprehending 
technologies in terms of large-scale challenges related to 
political, social, economic, legal and environmental. These are 
large scale challenges that affect individual behavior as well as 
societies in general. Thus, adopting the PIT viewpoint enables 
us to move away from blanket solutions related to low-cost 
public mobility deriving from the viewpoint of PIT. 
The rest of the paper is divided into six sections. Section 2 
presents the challenges of personal mobility and Vehicle 
design for urban India for 2035-2040. Section 3 introduces 
scenario planning steps and details of the methodology 
followed. Section 4 presents the scenarios based on scenario 
logic. The article concludes with Section 5 and the refinement 
of the scenarios based on probability, preferability, possibility, 
and plausibility of occurrence. 
 
II. PUBLIC TRANSIT SYSTEMS AND PERSONAL MOBILITY 
AND VEHICLE DESIGN FOR URBAN INDIA 
Mumbai, as a megacity, is always filled with activity. The 
movement of people is high during the day with the peak 
levels of morning and evening rush hours. The traffic trickles 
down to a minimum in the wee hours of the morning, with the 
pace picking up with the sunrise. Within this milieu, Mumbai 
 
979-8-3503-2486-0/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE 
2023 IEEE International Symposium on Technology and Society (ISTAS) | 979-8-3503-2486-0/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ISTAS57930.2023.10306226
Authorized licensed use limited to: Chalmers University of Technology Sweden. Downloaded on March 09,2024 at 15:52:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
is turning towards setting up a network of metro lines along 
with its already existing train system (called “Mumbai 
Locals”). In addition, roadway traffic in Mumbai also suffers 
due to congestion due to the constant construction of its 
expanding metro system. The residents of Mumbai own 
several private vehicles as well as have access to several 
curbside taxis and auto-rickshaws, as well as ride-hailing app 
services. The challenge for Mumbaikars (residents of 
Mumbai) is not that there is any dearth of mobility services, 
but the bottleneck is due to large numbers, as well as arterial 
roadways in several regions in the city. 
Given these circumstances, we wanted to focus on the 
design of human-centered personal mobility in this rapidly 
evolving future with a horizon of 15-20 years (2035-2040). 
The choice of this horizon is important as, we assume, 
changes in large-scale public interest systems are often 
perceptible over a decade. Therefore, designing for the future 
with a horizon of one decade is typically where the impact of 
the design could be envisioned without breaking its moorings 
with the present [5]-[10]. In other words, with the major 
ongoing trends and transformations, how can we leverage 
human-centered design to envision a personal-mobility-based 
future? 
 
III. THEORETICAL AND METHODOLOGICAL FRAMEWORKS 
Speculative Design (also Design Fictions, Design Futures) is a 
sub-field of human-centered design where designers envision 
futuristic artifacts, services, systems, and the way people 
would deal with them in the future [15]-[24]. This is a rapidly 
growing area of design where people use lateral thinking, 
mock-ups, and rapid prototyping methods to generate novel 
design ideas about the future scenarios of human technology 
interactions. The envisioned futures can be developed using 
several envisioning and foresight methods [11]-[13]. In this 
article, we use a scenario planning process for developing 
requirements for personal mobility in urban megacities in 
India. 
Scenarios consist of narratives to describe trends, events, 
and situations based on a few alternative assumptions [11]- 
[13]. The key idea is that using systemic methods, different 
vignettes can be created for comprehending the futures, which 
may serve for design, planning and policy making for the 
future. In the present case, these assumptions allowed for the 
creation of exploratory scenarios that are based on future 
trends and uncertainties along with feedback and insights from 
expert mobility and vehicle designers. These scenarios were 
developed with a special focus on inner coherence, appropriate 
variation, and breadth, along with proper validity. In this case, 
the five designers involved in the feedback process had 
extensive design experience in the mobility and vehicle sector. 
To create scenarios, the following steps [11], [12] were 
followed (detailed below further): 
1) Select the key issue and time frame: 2035-2040 
2) Derive driving forces from varied sources such as 
government reports, industry reports, and magazines 
highlighting technological and other social trends; 
3) Evaluate forces based on perceived importance and 
uncertainties with the help of experts; 
4) Establishing scenario logic by highlighting deep 
uncertainties by selecting unrelated dimensions useful 
for design activities; 
5) Mapping the trends and forces in the quadrants created 
by the two identified dimensions; 
6) Creating scenarios based on the content of the 
quadrants identified in the previous step; 
7) Assessment of scenarios based on plausibility, richness, 
internal coherence, and consistency, as well as expert 
stakeholders’ viewpoints; and 
8) Detailing and deepening the selected scenario for 
further insights and providing the pathway for design 
ideations. 
 
IV. DEVELOPED SCENARIOS FOR NEXT-GENERATION MOBILITY 
A. Forces: Trends and uncertainties 
Firstly, driving forces in terms of major trends with a 
special focus on India were gleaned from several industry 
reports, government reports, white papers, expert opinions, 
and other academic as well as grey literature. These driving 
forces are the factors that can influence and drive the future 
from the technological to the political dimensions. These 
driving forces are categorized under six themes of the 
PESTLE Analysis method, namely Political, Economic, 
Social, Technological, Law, and Environmental. The PESTLE 
technique is an environmental scanning approach for 
understanding the key trends and uncertainties of the driving 
forces [14]. In envisioning the future of mobility, we must 
consider it a PIT at various levels of abstraction ranging from 
political to technological. This approach enables us to 
comprehend the breadth of issues involved in mobility design. 
Therefore, PESTLE serves as the most appropriate means of 
thematically. organizing the driving forces. 
A total of 249 driving forces were listed. Following this, 
the list was shared with five industry design experts from the 
automotive sector to rate the ‘Importance’ and ‘Uncertainty’ 
of the said driving forces on a Likert scale ranging from one 
(minimum) to five (maximum). These experts had more than 
12 years (in one case 22 years) of industry experience and 
were involved in various automobile industries with major 
vehicle manufacturers in India. 
With the data from five industry experts, the driving forces 
were plotted on an Importance vs. Uncertainty graph to 
signify the influence of every factor on the future and to what 
degree of certainty. Based on the Importance vs. Uncertainty 
plot, a matrix was created using two axes derived from the 
scenario logic—asset ownership and experience (Figure 1). 
The 
asset 
ownership 
ranged 
between 
personal 
and 
shared/leased. The experience ranged from personalized to 
standardized. These broad dimensions of the scenario logic 
helped in providing coherence to the various forces identified 
in the PESTLE listing. Four scenarios were created using 
these driving forces in each quadrant. These scenarios also 
derived from the earlier classification of importance and 
uncertainty. After the scenarios were detailed, they were rated 
by industry experts on a Likert scale in terms of Probability, 
Plausibility, Possibility, and Preferability of each scenario. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Chalmers University of Technology Sweden. Downloaded on March 09,2024 at 15:52:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
The scenario rated most highly amongst the dimensions was 
chosen as the final speculative scenario for developing the 
design project. 
 
 
Fig. 1. Matrix with horizontal axis: User Experience (personal— 
shared/leased), vertical axis: Asset Ownership (personalized—standardized). 
Selective forces have been depicted here. 
 
A. Novel Mobility scenarios 
1) Scenario 1: Personalized Experience with Personal 
Assets 
Urban India, in this scenario, has a demand for 
personalized/customized experiences with personal assets as 
the country's middle class grows and becomes more tech- 
savvy. We see a significant shift towards individualism, where 
people place greater importance on their personal needs, 
desires, and aspirations, where consumers' focus is not just on 
the product, but the overall experience associated with it. This 
trend gives way to personalization, where consumers seek 
customized experiences tailored to their preferences. 
The rise of smart homes and IoT devices, which can be 
controlled and managed through personalized settings, is 
expected to gain significant traction in India. Such smart home 
technologies is already becoming popular in urban areas of 
India, enabling people to control everything from lighting to 
home entertainment systems through voice commands. The 
growth of wearable technology, such as smartwatches and 
fitness trackers too, is contributing to the growth of 
personalized user experiences, particularly in the healthcare 
and fitness sectors. 
The growth of virtual avatars and virtual communities is 
another trend that is on the rise, offering people the chance to 
interact and engage with others in a virtual environment. In the 
metaverse, digital possessions are becoming increasingly 
valuable, and cyber security is a top priority. This is currently 
a trend that is being seen to rise. 
Transformable spaces are becoming increasingly popular, 
with people looking for ways to adapt their living and 
workspaces to meet their changing needs. In-home healthcare 
is gaining traction, with people seeking ways to access 
medical care and services from the comfort of their own 
homes. 
Data-driven policies are increasingly becoming the norm, 
with businesses and governments relying on data to make 
informed decisions, and the push towards Zero Emissions 
Vehicles cost parity has made electric vehicles more 
affordable and accessible. Businesses focus on targeted 
marketing by using data to personalize their marketing 
campaigns and reach the right audience. Synthetic media laws 
are being put in place to regulate the use of AI-generated 
content, and data laws are becoming more stringent to protect 
individuals' privacy and security. 
Vehicles in scenario 1 include cars designed to provide a 
personalized and customized experience for their owners. The 
car's interior and exterior design can be customized to the 
owner's preferences and style. Additionally, advanced AI and 
machine learning algorithms can be used to learn the driver's 
habits and preferences and adjust the car's performance 
accordingly. The car may learn the driver's preferred routes 
and driving style and adjust the suspension and engine 
performance accordingly. Vehicles might be designed to 
integrate with other personal assets, such as smart homes or 
wearable devices, to provide a seamless and personalized 
experience. In addition, the key idea is to understand the 
vehicle as a modular unit in terms of connecting various parts 
as in a kit. 
 
Key themes for design for vehicles in scenario 1: 
● 
Tailored driving experiences that suit their 
individual needs and preferences; 
● 
A sense of ownership and pride in their 
customized vehicle; 
● 
Greater control over the maintenance and upkeep 
of their vehicle; 
● 
The ability to use their vehicle as an extension of 
their personal brand or identity; 
● 
The ability to modify and upgrade their vehicle 
over time to keep up with changing technology 
and personal preferences; 
● 
Customizable exterior and interior design options; 
● 
Smart 
connectivity 
options 
allow 
seamless 
integration with personal devices and homes, 
including voice-activated controls, personalized 
music and entertainment options, and automatic 
home integration; 
● 
Advanced autopilot and AI and machine learning 
capabilities to learn the driver's habits and 
preferences and adjust the vehicle settings 
accordingly, 
such 
as 
preferred 
route 
and 
temperature settings; 
● 
Personalized safety features, such as adaptive 
cruise control and lane departure warning 
systems, can be customized to the driver's 
preferences and driving style; 
● 
Advanced interaction, extended reality, and 
integration with wearable devices and smart home 
systems to create a seamless transition from home 
to car; 
● 
As each vehicle is unique, maintenance and 
repairs may require specialized expertise and 
parts, which can be more expensive and time- 
consuming to obtain. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Chalmers University of Technology Sweden. Downloaded on March 09,2024 at 15:52:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
2) Scenario 2: Personalized Experience with Personal 
Assets 
In this scenario in urban India in 2040, standardized user 
experiences have become more prevalent as technology and 
design standards continue to evolve. Operating systems, 
software interfaces, and website designs become streamlined 
and user-friendly, providing a consistent and familiar 
experience across different devices and platforms. Personal 
assets such as cars and homes become more connected and 
integrated with technology, providing a seamless and 
standardized user experience. They expect seamless and 
intuitive experiences, whether they are accessing e- 
Government services, using ride-sharing services, or charging 
their EVs. This trend is driven by a need for simplicity and 
efficiency as people's attention span decreases due to digital 
overload. 
Also, with an abundance of information available at their 
fingertips, users' attention spans have decreased, leading to a 
need for more engaging and interactive content in extended 
reality. Ride-sharing services have become increasingly 
popular but concerns over congestion in these modes also 
substantially increase. To promote the adoption of electric 
vehicles, the government has introduced fiscal incentives and 
charging station incentives to encourage the growth of the 
charging infrastructure. Smart infrastructure and charging grid 
expansion have made EV charging accessible and convenient, 
with charging stations now available in most urban areas. The 
government has implemented smart traffic management 
systems to reduce accidents and congestion, with pedestrian 
walkways and crossings designed to minimize the risk of 
accidents. 
The government and private companies have invested in 
infrastructure and initiatives to bridge the digital divide and 
provide access to digital technologies to all citizens. However, 
concerns over digital surveillance and cyberterrorism are on 
the rise, making users increasingly aware of the need to 
protect their privacy and security. The government has 
implemented stringent data privacy laws to protect citizens' 
personal data, and digital surveillance regulations are in place 
to prevent unauthorized access to sensitive information. 
Vehicles in scenario 2 would be designed to provide a 
consistent and familiar user experience across different 
devices and platforms. The operating system, and software 
interfaces, would be streamlined and user-friendly, making it 
easy for owners to navigate and use their vehicles, like how 
smartphones have standardized interfaces. However, owners 
could customize certain aspects of the vehicle, such as the 
seating or sound system, to their personal preferences. 
 
Key themes for design for vehicles in scenario 2: 
● A consistent and familiar user experience, 
regardless of the make and model of the vehicle; 
● Lower maintenance and repair costs due to the use 
of standardized parts and interfaces; 
● More affordable pricing due to economies of scale 
from standardized manufacturing processes; 
● Lower depreciation rates due to the widespread 
availability of similar vehicles on the market; 
● Standardized dashboard configurations, allowing 
for easy navigation and access to important 
information; 
● Personalized and Seamless integration with 
personal devices allows for easy access to music, 
infotainment, and other personal content; 
● Integration with standardized interfaces and 
operating systems for a consistent user experience 
across different devices and platforms; 
● Advanced 
driver 
assistance 
systems, 
route 
planning, adaptive cruise control and traffic jam 
assist, reduce driver fatigue and improve safety; 
● As these vehicles have standardized features, they 
may lack the unique qualities and characteristics 
that some people desire; and 
● User experience may not be optimal for all users, 
a standardized UX may work well for most 
people, but it may not meet the needs and 
preferences of all users. 
 
3) Scenario 3: Personalized Experiences with Leased 
Assets 
In 2040, India has made significant progress in adopting 
emerging technologies that have transformed the way people 
live and work. Human-machine symbiosis has become a 
common feature in many industries, with people working 
alongside machines to enhance their capabilities and 
productivity. This has also led to the rise of transhumanism, 
with people augmenting their physical and mental abilities 
with technology to become more adaptable and flexible. 
Ambient intelligence has become ubiquitous, with homes, 
offices, and public spaces equipped with sensors and smart 
devices that provide personalized services and experiences. 
People have become accustomed to having their environments 
adapt to their needs and preferences, thanks to the 
proliferation of smart contracts that enable seamless 
interactions with technology. 
Inclusivity has become a core value, with efforts to bridge 
the hypoconnectivity gap that previously limited access to 
technology for certain groups. Democratized entrepreneurship 
has also become a reality, with the rise of platforms that 
enable anyone with a good idea and the skills to implement it 
to launch a business. 
Battery costs have plummeted, making electric vehicles and 
other battery-powered devices affordable for all. Autonomous 
certification and collision and safety laws have been 
developed, paving the way for the widespread adoption of 
autonomous vehicles and other machines. Ride-sharing has 
become the norm, reducing traffic congestion and pollution. 
Despite the increasing reliance on technology, in-person 
interaction remains important, with people recognizing the 
value of face-to-face communication and community building. 
People have also become more adaptable and flexible, 
recognizing that change is constant and that they need to stay 
ahead of the curve to remain relevant in a rapidly evolving 
world. 
The growth of the tech industry and the demand for 
customized  solutions  in  fields  such  as  healthcare  and 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Chalmers University of Technology Sweden. Downloaded on March 09,2024 at 15:52:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
education drive demand for leased assets with highly 
personalized UX. The development of modular and flexible 
leased assets, such as 3D printing and modular furniture, 
enables businesses and individuals to tailor their assets to their 
specific needs. Customized software systems provide highly 
tailored and efficient user experiences, such as advanced 
machine learning or artificial intelligence systems that 
automatically adjust to individual user preferences. 
Vehicles in this category involve cars designed to be shared 
and leased, so they need to be versatile and easily adaptable to 
different users' preferences. Users would subscribe to different 
kinds of vehicles as per their needs and reconfigure them to 
their immediate needs. The vehicles would be designed to 
provide a highly personalized and tailored experience for each 
individual user. The car's interior can be easily reconfigured to 
suit different users' needs, such as changing the seating 
arrangements or adjusting the climate control and lighting. 
Additionally, the car's AI can learn the usage habits of 
different users and adjust the car's performance accordingly to 
each user's interactions to provide a more intuitive and 
efficient experience. Additionally, vehicles may be designed 
to integrate with other shared or leased assets, such as co- 
working spaces or temporary accommodations, to provide a 
seamless and personalized experience. 
 
Key themes for design for vehicles in scenario 3: 
● A sense of ownership and control over the 
vehicle, even if they do not own it outright; 
● Greater flexibility and convenience, with the 
ability to customize the vehicle to their specific 
needs and preferences; 
● Lower costs since they do not have to bear the full 
burden of vehicle ownership and maintenance; 
● Reduced environmental impact, since shared or 
leased vehicles can be used more efficiently and 
effectively than individually owned vehicles; 
● The ability to switch between different vehicles 
and user experiences, depending on their needs 
and preferences, at any given time, and advanced 
customization; 
● Efficient and convenient charging options, with 
access to a range of charging stations and 
incentives for EV users; 
● Integration with shared mobility platforms and 
services to allow for seamless transitions between 
different modes of transportation; 
● Advanced 
user 
authentication 
and 
security 
features ensure that only authorized users can 
access the vehicle. 
● Advanced telematics, intelligent route planning, 
and data analytics features to track usage patterns 
and optimize vehicle performance along with 
seamless connectivity with home devices; 
● Shared assets may not be in optimal condition, as 
these vehicles may be used by multiple people, 
and they may not be maintained to the same 
standards as a personally owned vehicle along 
with access requirements. 
 
4) Scenario 4: Standardized Experiences with Leased 
Assets 
In this scenario, India has experienced a significant 
increase in urbanization and population growth, with an 
estimated 9 billion people. However, the trend of working 
from home has become more prevalent, driven by advances in 
technology and the need for increased flexibility in the 
workforce. This has led to a decrease in the demand for 
traditional office spaces and an increase in the demand for 
shared workspaces and flexible office arrangements. 
The middle class has grown, and collaboration has become 
more important than ever as people seek out new opportunities 
to work together and create value. This has led to the rise of 
the gig economy, with people increasingly choosing to work 
on a project-by-project basis rather than pursuing traditional 
employment. 
India has implemented strict fuel economy and CO2 
emission standards, as well as battery management regulations 
and waste and scrapping regulations, to reduce the country's 
carbon footprint and address climate change. Climate tax and 
charging costs have also been introduced to encourage 
sustainable practices and discourage the use of non-renewable 
resources. 
The subscription economy has become more popular, with 
people preferring to lease or share assets rather than own them 
outright. This trend has extended beyond physical assets to 
include services and experiences, such as streaming services 
and subscription-based fitness programs. 
Structural unemployment has been a challenge, as the high 
rate of change in industry has led to the displacement of 
workers in certain sectors. However, India has also seen a rise 
in decentralized finance, which has enabled more people to 
access financial services and participate in the economy. 
The growth of the gig economy and freelance work drives 
the demand for leased assets with standardized UX. There is a 
rise in coworking spaces and shared offices, which offer 
flexible leasing arrangements and standardized amenities in 
the urban centers of the country. With the growth of remote 
work and cloud computing, the demand for such assets has 
risen in the technology sector. 
Vehicles in this category, cars are designed to provide a 
consistent and standardized user experience for all users. The 
vehicles may be designed to integrate with other shared or 
leased assets to provide a seamless and standardized 
experience across different modes of transportation. 
 
Key themes for design for vehicles in scenario 4: 
● A consistent and familiar user experience, 
regardless of the make and model of the vehicle 
with limited personalization; 
● Lower costs since users do not have to bear the 
full 
burden 
of 
vehicle 
ownership 
and 
maintenance; 
● Reduced environmental impact, since shared or 
leased vehicles can be used more efficiently and 
effectively than individually owned vehicles; 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Chalmers University of Technology Sweden. Downloaded on March 09,2024 at 15:52:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
● Greater convenience, with the ability to access 
vehicles on demand without having to worry 
about maintenance or repair issues; 
● More affordable pricing due to economies of scale 
from standardized manufacturing processes 
● Seamless integration with ride-sharing and car- 
sharing services, allowing for easy booking and 
payment options; 
● Advanced safety features, such as collision 
detection and automatic braking systems, are 
standardized across all vehicles in this category; 
● Integration with standardized software as well as 
standard smart city infrastructure and services, 
such as traffic management systems and public 
transportation, to provide a more comprehensive 
mobility solution; 
● Shared assets may not be in optimal condition; as 
with personalized vehicles, shared assets may not 
be maintained to the same standards as a 
personally owned vehicle. 
B. Scenario Assessment 
These four scenarios were shown to five experts in the 
field of mobility design. They were asked to rate the five 
scenarios (on a Likert Scale) in terms of their Plausibility, 
Preferability, Probability, and Possibility of occurrence. In 
addition, all the scenarios were discussed with the experts, and 
they were asked about their choices and ratings. These insights 
were then used to strengthen and fine-tune the scenarios and 
broaden them. Based on their insights, scenario 3 was selected 
and broadened in its possible manifestation and meanings 
(Figure 2, Table 1). 
 
TABLE I 
SUMMARY OF AVERAGE RATINGS OF EXPERTS FOR VARIOUS SCENARIOS 
BASED ON 4PS 
 
 
Scenarios 
4Ps 
1 
2 
3 
4 
Possibility 
4.6 
5 
5 
4.4 
Probability 
3.6 
4.2 
3.8 
2.8 
Plausibility 
4 
3.4 
4.4 
3.2 
Preferability 
3.6 
3.4 
4.6 
3 
 
 
V. DISCUSSION: IMPLICATIONS OF VEHICLE DESIGN FOR 
PERSONALIZED EXPERIENCE AND LEASED ASSETS 
One of the main drivers is the desire for flexibility and 
convenience. As people become more mobile and less tied to a 
specific location or job, they may be less interested in owning 
physical assets that require maintenance and upkeep. By 
subscribing to assets, such as cars or homes, people could 
enjoy the benefits of ownership without the associated 
responsibilities. 
Another factor driving this trend is the desire for 
personalized experiences. In a world where everything from 
music to fashion is personalized, people may also want to 
customize their transportation, living arrangements, and other 
assets to suit their specific needs and preferences. Subscribing 
to assets could allow people to access a wider variety of 
options and tailor their experiences to their individual tastes. 
 
Fig. 2. Plot of possibility, probability, plausibility, and preferability for four 
scenarios based on Table 1. Scenario 3 depicted as a square, was the final 
choice for further development. 
 
The rise of the sharing economy and the increasing 
awareness of environmental sustainability also contribute to 
this trend. By sharing resources and subscribing to assets, 
people could reduce waste and minimize their environmental 
impact. 
● 
Owning assets can be expensive, particularly for 
large items like homes, cars, or boats. Subscribing to 
these assets may be more affordable for some people, 
particularly those who may not have the resources to 
purchase them outright. 
● 
By subscribing to assets, people could have access to 
the latest technology without having to constantly 
buy new devices. This could be particularly 
appealing to those who value having the newest and 
most advanced technology available. 
● 
The sharing economy has grown in popularity in 
recent years, with platforms like Airbnb and Uber 
allowing people to share their homes or cars with 
others. In this type of economy, subscribing to assets 
instead of owning them could be a natural extension, 
as people embrace the idea of sharing resources and 
reducing waste. 
● 
For some people, subscribing to a home or apartment 
could provide greater flexibility in terms of where 
they live and for how long. This could be particularly 
appealing to those who move frequently for work or 
personal reasons or who value the ability to change 
their living arrangements as needed. 
A. Personalized Experience on Ride-Hailing Service 
This could be a scenario for a busy professional who has a 
demanding work schedule and needs flexibility in their 
transportation needs. They subscribe to a ride-hailing service 
that offers personalized experiences and allows them to 
choose from a variety of vehicles for different durations of 
time. 
While using the ride-hailing app, one sees a variety of 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Chalmers University of Technology Sweden. Downloaded on March 09,2024 at 15:52:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
options based on their preferences and needs, such as different 
vehicle types depending on their mood and destination. One 
can also customize their ride with different amenities like Wi- 
Fi, music, or snacks to make their journey more comfortable 
and enjoyable. 
A user can subscribe to a vehicle for varying durations of 
time, depending on the needs. For a few hours for a business 
meeting, one can subscribe to a short-term plan. For a longer 
period, such as a weekend getaway, there are long-term plans. 
The ride-hailing service offers flexible subscription plans that 
cater to their needs, allowing them to choose the duration and 
pricing that works best. 
The ride-hailing service also uses advanced technologies to 
provide other personalized experiences, such as the app 
remembering preferences and usage history and suggesting 
personalized routes, destinations, and services based on past 
behavior. 
B. Multiple Families Share Ownership of One Vehicle 
Co-owning a vehicle might occur in the future. Sharing a 
vehicle with another family reduces the cost of ownership for 
both parties involved but can sometimes lead to disagreements 
over its usage. If one family needs the car on short notice, it 
can cause conflict with the other’s plans. Clear usage policies 
and agreements need to be in place from the beginning to 
mitigate such disputes. 
Shared ownership of a vehicle can make it difficult to track 
maintenance and repair costs and can raise complex insurance 
and liability issues, especially in case of an accident or 
damage to the vehicle, especially if both families are using the 
car equally. It can be difficult to determine who is responsible. 
C. Personalized Experiences on Subscribed Personal-Drive 
Car 
This could be a scenario for a young working professional 
who needs a car to commute to work and run errands. 
However, they do not want to buy a car outright, as it is too 
expensive and not sustainable. Instead, they opt for a self- 
drive car subscription service that allows them to lease a car 
for flexible durations. 
The personal-drive car subscription service can offer a 
range of vehicle options, from basic models to high-end 
luxury cars. They may select a mid-range car that meets their 
budget and needs. The subscription service also offers a range 
of customization options. 
One can enjoy the flexibility and convenience of their 
personal-drive car subscription service and can change their 
vehicle as per their need and not have to worry about 
maintenance or servicing, as the subscription service takes 
care of it. 
D. Implications, Limitations and further directions 
The current article used the scenario planning process for 
comprehending speculative design futures in urban mobility as 
a PIT. It addressed issues of public-private ownership and 
usage and how this affects the design of mobility in terms of 
issues of PESTLE categories. Currently, the focus was on 
getting insights from design experts as the focus was towards 
vehicle design. In the future, heterogeneous perspectives can 
be adopted for a more egalitarian understanding of mobility 
and PIT. Thus, this approach would help us in thinking about 
broader issues of mobility, beyond vehicle design with a view 
towards understanding public interest and enhancing public 
good. 
The current paper also showed one systematic approach 
adopted for developing scenarios that could be later used for 
the design of products and services in urban mobility. Thus, 
this paper adds to the corpus of speculative design methods 
and public-interest technology in using existing strategic 
planning tools to envision human-centred design futures for 
urban mobility. These scenarios and their ensuing themes can 
serve as prompts for designers to envision future forms. In the 
future, other structured methods can be used with the current 
steps to broaden and deepen the scenarios and provide 
guidance to designers in new concept design of vehicles. 
 
V. CONCLUSION 
The main objective of this paper was to envision personal 
mobility for Indian mega-cities, such as Mumbai, in the future 
2035-2040. The focus was to envision themes that would 
serve as the basis of design requirements. These design 
requirements will then be used for ideations and developing a 
final design for vehicles for personal mobility. In this paper, 
with a systematic design process, a speculative future scenario 
is developed based on the trends in the key driving forces and 
the foresight of automotive industry experts. The result of this 
process highlights that in the future, by 2040, people will seek 
personalized user experiences in the products they use and 
would prefer to lease or subscribe to these assets rather than 
own them outright. This scenario acts as the premise for 
speculative design projects and dictates the user and their 
environment in such a setup. Since the focus of this project is 
on the design of future mobility, there is a need for 
comprehending issues of actual vehicle design that will inform 
future research. These include future-based ideation methods, 
speculative 
prototyping 
methods, 
and 
concept 
design 
processes to generate the final vehicle form for personal 
mobility aimed toward the future 2035-2040. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was presented at the IEEE International 
Symposium on Technology and Society 2023 (ISTAS23) Co- 
Located Workshop on Public Interest Technology (PIT) for 
Innovation in Global Development, organized by Roba Abbas, 
Katina Michael, Dinara Davlembayeva, Savvas Papagiannidis 
and Jeremy Pitt. The authors thank the organizers and 
reviewers for their work. In addition, the authors thank Prof. 
Katina Michael for her insightful review, suggestions and 
comments. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
T. D. McGuinness and H. Schank, Power to the public: The promise of 
public interest technology. Princeton University Press, 2023. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Chalmers University of Technology Sweden. Downloaded on March 09,2024 at 15:52:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[2] 
A. Genus and A. Stirling, “Collingridge and the dilemma of control: 
Towards responsible and accountable innovation,” Research Policy, vol. 
47, no. 1, pp. 61–69, 2018. DOI:10.1177/1946756718803721 
[3] 
A. May and T. Ross, “The design of civic technology: factors that 
influence public participation and impact.,” Ergonomics, vol. 61, no. 2, 
pp. 214–225, Feb. 2018. DOI:10.1080/00140139.2017.1349939 
[4] 
E. Stribling, “How Engineers Think and Implications for Public Interest 
Technology,” IEEE Technology and Society Magazine, vol. 40, no. 3, 
pp. 37–41. DOI: 10.1109/MTS.2021.3101925 
[5] 
L. Prause and K. Dietz, “Just mobility futures: Challenges for e-mobility 
transitions from a global perspective,” Futures, vol. 141, p. 102987, 
2022. DOI:10.1016/j.futures.2022.102987 
[6] 
P. Moriarty and D. Honnery, “Low-mobility: The future of transport,” 
Futures, vol. 40, no. 10, pp. 865–872, 2008. 
DOI:10.1016/j.futures.2008.07.021 
[7] 
S. A. Shaheen, A. P. Cohen, J. Broader, R. Davis, L. Brown, R. 
Neelakantan, and D. Gopalakrishna, “Mobility on demand planning and 
implementation: current practices, innovations, and emerging mobility 
futures,” United States. Department of Transportation. Intelligent 
Transportation, 2020. https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3hc6m2vj 
[8] 
M. Büscher, M. Sheller, and D. Tyfield, “Mobility intersections: Social 
research, social futures,” Mobilities, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 485–497, 2016. 
DOI:10.1080/17450101.2016.1211818 
[9] 
H. Sustar, M. N. Mladenović, and M. Givoni, “The landscape of 
envisioning and speculative design methods for sustainable mobility 
futures,” Sustainability, vol. 12, no. 6, 2020. DOI: 10.3390/su12062447 
[10] K. 
Vöckler, 
P. 
Eckart, 
Mobility 
Design: 
Shaping 
Future 
MobilityVolume 1: Practice. Berlin, Boston: JOVIS Verlag GmbH; 
2023. DOI:10.1515/9783868599725 
[11] C. Stewart, “Integral scenarios: reframing theory, building from 
practice”. Futures, vol. 40:pp.160–172, 2007. 
DOI:10.1016/j.futures.2007.11.013 
[12] P. Schoemaker. “Scenario Planning: A tool for Strategic Thinking”. MIT 
Sloan Management Review, Winter, Vol 36, no. 2, pp. 25-40, 1995. 
https://sloanreview.mit.edu/article/scenario-planning-a-tool-for- 
strategic-thinking/ 
[13] P. Schwartz. The art of the long view: planning for the future in an 
uncertain world. Currency, 2012. 
[14] L.Partridge, Managing Change: Learning made simple. Routledge, 2007 
[15] A. Dunne and F. Raby, Speculative everything: design, fiction, and 
social dreaming. MIT press, 2013. 
[16] P. Coulton, J. Lindley, and H. A. Akmal, “Design Fiction: Does the 
search for plausibility lead to deception?,” Proceedings of Design 
Research Society Conference 2016, 27-30 June 2016, Brighton, UK, 
pp.369-384, 2016. 
[17] J. Bleecker. Design fiction: A short essay on design, science, fact, and 
fiction. Near Futures Laboratory, 2009. 
[18] A. Tiberio and L. Imbesi, “:Blackbox: A Design Fiction Research 
Project,” The Design Journal, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. S3707–S3712, 
2017.DOI: 10.1080/14606925.2017.1352867 
[19] A. Dunne, Hertzian tales: Electronic products, aesthetic experience, and 
critical design. MIT Press, 2008. 
[20] T. Markussen and E. Knutz, “The poetics of design fiction,” presented at 
the Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Designing 
Pleasurable Products and Interfaces, 2013, pp. 231–240. 
[21] R. F. Gonzatto, F. M. Van Amstel, L. E. Merkle, and T. Hartmann, “The 
ideology of the future in design fictions,” Digital Creativity, vol. 24, no. 
1, pp. 36–45, 2013. DOI: 10.1080/14626268.2013.772524 
[22] A. Bokulich, “Rethinking Thought Experiments,” Perspectives on 
Science, 
vol. 
9, 
no. 
3, 
pp. 
285–307, 
Sep. 
2001. 
DOI: 
10.1162/10636140160176143 
[23] J. Baggini, The Pig that Wants to be Eaten: And 99 Other Thought 
Experiments. Granta Books, 2010. 
[24] L. Barendregt and N. S. Vaage, “Speculative Design as Thought 
Experiment,” She Ji: The Journal of Design, Economics, and 
Innovation, 
vol. 
7, 
no. 
3, 
pp. 
374–402, 
2021. 
DOI: 
10.1016/j.sheji.2021.06.001 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Chalmers University of Technology Sweden. Downloaded on March 09,2024 at 15:52:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
