1 
Speculation: Forms and Functions 
 
 
Dirk S. Hovorka 
University of Sydney 
dirk.hovorka@sydney.edu.au 
 
Benjamin Mueller 
University of Bremen 
muellerb@uni-bremen.de 
 
 
Abstract 
Speculation is fundamental to scientific research. 
Both as an activity and an object, speculations take 
many forms and function in multiple ways. While 
speculation that obtains evidentiary support is well 
established as a source of theoretical contribution, 
other forms of speculation open pathways for 
transformation and critique. Digital geographies are 
proposed as an alternative form of speculation that 
enables researchers to foray into inhabited futures 
enabling critique of present research activities that are 
implicated in possible futures. Quality criteria are 
offered to enable legitimization of speculative 
approaches in IS research.  
Keywords: 
Speculation, 
Imagination, 
Evidence; 
Futures, Alternate worlds 
1. Introduction 
"Bold ideas, unjustified anticipations, and speculative 
thought, are our only means for interpreting nature: 
our only organ, our only instrument, for grasping her” 
(Popper, 1959, p. 280) 
“I think that only daring speculation can lead us 
further, and not accumulation of facts” 
(Albert Einstein, in a letter to Michele Besso in 1952) 
“At the root of the problem lies […] a peculiarly 
modern severing of imaginary worlds from the world 
in real life” 
(Ingold, 2021, p. xii) 
It is well understood that knowledge does not come 
pre-packaged as discrete, self-justifying objects but 
must be wrestled into existence. There is a large 
literature and robust debate regarding the role of 
empirical observation, hypothesis generation and 
testing, and theory building in both quantitative and 
qualitative realms. Less discussed is the critical role in 
scientific progress played by proposition, conjecture, 
supposition, imagination, hypothetical scenarios, and 
other forms of speculative thought. While fine 
distinctions among these terms can be made, in 
aggregate, these activities provide “the language and 
conceptualization by which we produce contingent 
knowledge, ideas, abstractions, risks […] all of which 
radically shape our individual and collective futures” 
(Rogers, 2021, p. 3). What these terms have in common 
is a willingness to seek knowledge in a contingent 
manner that is speculative and relies upon imagination. 
While many scientists might not see that epistemic 
progress must include speculation and imagination, in 
Popper’s view, speculative thought and bold ideas are 
a necessary means of grasping nature. From this view, 
construction of a hypothesis is a speculative account 
because it does not (yet) entrain evidence. The goal of 
the researcher is to create strong tests that will refute 
(falsify) the speculative account and in the absence of 
such falsification the speculation is held to be true. The 
justification for speculation is grounded in the 
researcher’s ability to discover evidence. The quote 
from Einstein reinforces the idea that speculation is 
critical to scientific progress. It is through speculation 
or guessing that new knowledge is formed prior to the 
facts that are then mustered to support the speculation. 
In contrast, Ingold’s account presents imaginary 
worlds as a foundational aspect of living and one that 
modern science has sought to expunge. From this view 
imagination “opens up paths in and through the world, 
rather than fixing endpoints in advance” (Ingold, 2021, 
p. 36). These three positions reveal that speculation is 
firmly embedded in scientific thinking and may take 
many forms and may perform multiple functions. 
To explore these forms and functions, we assess a 
broad range of philosophical and scientific literature 
for the multiple ways speculative accounts appear in 
science. The empirical emphasis in most sciences, 
including IS, conceals underlying forms of speculation. 
For example, every proposition is an educated guess, a 
speculation for which the researcher believes 
acceptable evidence can be found. In another form, 
metaphors (e.g., conceiving of atoms as “miniature 
solar systems;" Haack, 2019), the generative capacity 
in problem solving (Schön, 1993), and the use of 
symbolic metaphor in information system development 
(Hirschheim & Newman, 1991) are examples of 
speculations that are not thought to be true but provide 
a basis for cognition and shared vocabularies (Lakoff 
& Johnson, 1980). Similarly, myths as “a dramatic 
narrative of imagined events” (Trice & Beyer, 1984, p. 
655) are suggested to be a source of creative theorizing 
(Hassan et al., 2022). These contrasting examples 
illustrate speculative epistemologies that can be 
distinguished based on the need (or not) for 
confirmatory evidence and differentiated by function to 
reveal the world or to provoke discussion of contingent 
possibilities and choice.  
To clarify the meanings and functions of 
speculation, we first identify a variety of accepted 
forms of contingent knowledge that are speculative in 
the sense that they are not (yet) considered to be true. 
They may be based on the expectation that supporting 
evidence 
can 
be 
obtained 
(e.g., 
hypotheses, 
Proceedings of the 57th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences | 2024
Page 6448
URI: https://hdl.handle.net/10125/107159
978-0-9981331-7-1
(CC BY-NC-ND 4.0)
2 
propositions) or they may be accepted, as in in the case 
of metaphors, but they are not literally considered as 
truth. We then examine the different functions of 
speculation that support fruitful research activity and 
navigating epistemic distance beyond the immediate 
and observable. Finally, we expand on the potential 
roles of speculative approaches for identifying 
alternative futures (Dunne & Raby, 2013; Frank, 2017; 
Hovorka & Peter, 2021b) as a site for inquiry and 
present action. Before concluding our discussion, we 
provide the first steps of a foundational debate toward 
establishing quality criteria for a scholarly use of 
speculation. 
2. Conceptualizing Speculation  
There is an increasing interest in the role of 
speculation in the sciences that extends the robust 
discussion in the philosophy of science regarding the 
functions 
of 
speculation 
in 
establishing 
and 
maintaining values, epistemic rules, and ontology 
(Friedman & Hendry, 2019; Ingold, 2021; Lennon, 
2015; Weick, 2006). A sufficient set of examples of the 
importance of imagination in the progress of science 
(see for example: Currie, 2021; Ingold, 2021; Kuhn, 
1962) shows that the debate is not whether speculation 
exists in the scholarly discourse, but where it can be 
productive and how it can be evaluated.  
Unsurprisingly the roles of imagination in science 
are addressed from different perspectives with limited 
consensus regarding what imagination is (Holton, 
1998; Murphy, 2022). For example, in comparing 
imagination of experimental procedures, “there are 
indeed many different uses to which imagination can 
be put, but when we constrain our imaginings to fit the 
facts of the world as we know them, we are using an 
epistemic procedure that is much more akin to 
scientific experimentation than it is to mere flights of 
fancy. Although our imaginative experimentation will 
not be fool proof, neither is scientific experimentation. 
But in both cases, when we proceed cautiously, the 
beliefs that we arrive at will usually be justified” (Kind, 
2018, p. 244). From another perspective, imagination 
is considered to be the cognitive activity of forming 
‘images in the mind’ (for a review see: Murphy, 2022). 
Within this perspective of ‘mental images’ or ‘seeing 
in the mind’s eye’ there is debate on whether 
imagination is ‘perception-like’ (Kind, 2018) or a 
function of the ‘unreal,’ as a process of “deforming 
images provided by perception; it is above all the 
faculty of liberating us from first […] representations 
in perception" (Kaplan, 1972 p 3). Even more radically, 
Ingold (2021) argues that imagination is the process of 
“flying ahead of things as to disclose the present, in 
every moment of its emergence, as the future’s past” 
(p. 36). 
 
1 Oxford Dictionary, 2017 
2 https://dictionary.cambridge.org/ 
Although distinct, the variety of views regarding 
imagination—from images on the mind, to distorted 
perceptual images, to making sense of the world by 
opening “paths in and through the world” (Ingold, 2021 
p 3)—the literature notes there are numerous real 
situations where justification for progress in science is 
grounded in imagination, “that is, in which an 
imagining can justify our belief in a contingent claim 
about the world” (Kind, 2018). 
We now turn attention on a specific type of 
imagination, speculation, that is well established in 
scientific studies. The dictionary definition of 
speculation provides a starting point:  
a) the forming of a theory or conjecture without firm 
evidence.1 
b) the act of guessing possible answers to a question 
without having enough information to be certain.2 
It is observed that each of these definitions tie the 
quality of speculation to the sufficiency of evidence or 
information certainty. Our goal is to further expand our 
understanding of speculation and illustrate other 
functions for scientific speculation. 
The rationale for this argument lies in the 
constraints imposed by the IS field’s current research 
apparatus that limit the phenomena available for 
disciplinary scrutiny. There are phenomena, for which 
empirical observation is either difficult or impossible 
to obtain (Sullivan et al., 2023). These include but are 
not limited to emerging phenomena, criminal digital 
activity, highly sensitive or fragile human conditions, 
and notably, our relationships with the futures 
implicated in our research.  
Moreover, our apparatus “[…] tend[s] to organize 
phenomena bewildering in their layered complexity 
into clean overviews. They make smooth schemes that 
are more or less linear, with a demonstrative or an 
argumentative logic in which each event follows the 
one that came before. What may originally have been 
surprising is explained and is therefore no longer 
surprising or disturbing…” (Mol & Law, 2002). While 
such attempts at cleaner representations might make 
originally complex phenomena easier to grasp, 
simplification sometimes comes at the cost of 
misrepresentation. For example, Poole et al. (2000) 
argue that more complex process-based phenomena 
often get misrepresented as simple, linear processes 
even though the underlying phenomenon does not 
progress in such a way.  
The result of this narrowing is that the messiness of 
the world is obscured. For example, power relations, 
images of humanity, spatial distribution, and the 
epistemic rules of research itself are assumed to be self-
evident and stable. In IS, it is frequently the technology 
or socio-technical system that is changed under “all 
else being equal” conditions. Although a small number 
of factors or conditions may be altered as a counter-
 
 
Page 6449
3 
factual (Rubinstein & Good, 2013), these studies are 
few in number and limited in scope in that they only 
change a limited set of factors. One alternative to this 
reductionism is to acknowledge the forms of 
imagination and speculation in research and to pursue 
the functions these approaches provide for research 
progress. 
3. Forms of Speculation 
Scientific research has an uneasy relationship with 
speculation in part because it is haunted by early views 
of science as rational, value free, and objective. When 
faced with unknown or emerging phenomena with 
limited or no data, imagination and speculation of 
possible explanations or understanding is a necessary 
process in advancing new concepts or theories. While 
the literature on speculation is limited, forms of 
speculation are deeply embedded in scientific practice. 
When unknown phenomenon are addressed, Popper 
(1959) states: “The actual procedure of science is to 
operate with conjectures: to jump to conclusions—
often after one single observation” (p. 181). During 
periods of scientific instability (e.g., scientific crises), 
“the scientist in crisis will constantly try to generate 
speculative theories that, if successful, may disclose 
the road to a new paradigm, and if unsuccessful, can be 
surrendered with relative ease” (Kuhn, 1962, p. 87). 
Despite these philosophical admonitions, many areas 
of science employ a deductive approach that seeks 
epistemic security and demands that propositions, 
conjectures, hypothesis, and design principles be 
grounded in conservative, well-supported arguments 
from 
past 
scientific—often 
empirical—findings 
(Currie, 2021). This truth-relevant speculation appears 
in many forms in Information Systems research 
(Achinstein, 2018; Currie, 2021; Swedberg, 2021). 
Most common are hypotheses, propositions, and 
theories. For example Poon and Wagner (2001) make 
“educated guesses” and speculate regarding meta-
success factors in development of executive IS. 
Whether derived deductively (from prior literature) or 
inductively (from data), the acceptance of these forms 
of speculation are justified by the assumption that the 
truth or falsity of the hypothesis, prediction, or future 
design outcomes can be validated through the 
collection of suitable evidence. These truth-relevant 
forms of speculation are a common and well-
understood feature in social science. Here the question 
of what constitutes evidence that the speculation is true 
becomes crucial (Achinstein, 2001, 2018). In-depth 
discussions of the multiple conceptualizations of 
evidence are however outside the scope of this work 
(see for example: Achinstein, 2001, 2018; Chandler et 
al., 1994). 
But the demand for epistemic security may well 
prove to be problematic when facing new phenomena 
in IS (e.g., generative AI, surveillance capitalism at 
scale, digital ethics, technology in environmental 
health) when both problems and solutions have not yet 
been tamed. In these instances imagination of 
possibilities and speculation “are important in 
conceiving new theoretical ideas, in exploring the 
explanatory resources of those ideas, and in working 
out how to bring theoretical ideas into contact with 
empirical constraints” (Levy & Godfrey-Smith, 2019, 
p. 2). Many layers of scientific arguments are needed 
to cross epistemic distance (Carolan, 2004) from what 
is immediately observable to claims regarding 
unobservable phenomena such as human sentiment, 
digital objects, or predications of the futures in which 
our designs, implementations, and processes are 
implicated but have not yet eventuated. 
In these instances, truth-irrelevant speculation 
(Achinstein, 2018) can provides a means of reaching 
into uncertain and contingent socio-technical worlds 
both present and future. For example, metaphor—long 
argued as a foundational aspect of cognition (Lakoff & 
Johnson, 1980)—is also a substantive part of science 
(Brown, 2003; Hassan et al., 2022; Hirschheim & 
Newman, 1991; Leclercq-Vandelannoitte et al., 2014; 
Schultze & Orlikowski, 2001) and problem solving 
(Schön, 1993). From this view, metaphors are not mere 
linguistic embellishments but “are foundations for 
thought processes and conceptual understandings that 
function to map meaning from one knowledge and/or 
perceptual domain to another” (Taylor & Dewsbury, 
2018, p. 1). With the understanding that “metaphors 
ask us to imagine the world in a new way” (Cohen, 
1998, p. 1) we begin to observe that science does not 
progress through the mere pursuit of facts. The 
comparison here is not to claim that metaphor is 
speculative but rather to establish that imagination 
plays a foundational role in science. No one thinks that 
an atom is literally a set of ball-like spheres with other 
spheres in rapid orbit. Visual and linguistic metaphors 
serve as “fictions useful for explaining, predicting, and 
unifying certain observable phenomena” (Achinstein, 
2018 p 8). The metaphor allows people to grasp a 
shared understanding to work with the concept of an 
atom, rather than the literally accurate form of an atom. 
The IS field is rife with metaphors including: the 
information 
superhighway, 
cyberspace, 
artificial 
intelligence, and organizations as machines or 
organisms. These metaphors become reified in use and 
although common, often pass unnoticed as the 
imaginative fictions they are. 
As another example, Maxwell’s imaginary fluid 
hypothesis was a fiction that represented electricity as 
a fluid moving through tubes. It was not considered to 
be true but instead, “its purpose is to provide a fluid 
analogue of the electromagnetic field that will help 
others to understand known electrical and magnetic 
laws by employing an analogy between these laws and 
ones governing an imaginary fluid” (Achinstein, 2018 
p 7). Here we can observe that speculating some 
similarity between electricity and fluids enabled 
researchers to articulate the problem in a manner that 
enabled progress. 
Page 6450
4 
In a similar vein, social imaginaries (Jasanoff & 
Kim, 2015; Taylor, 2004) provide speculative accounts 
in intersubjective social realms. Fictional imaginaries 
have long been a prominent feature in the literature 
(Asimov, 2004; Huxley, 2004; Shelley, 2018, 1818) 
and as a means to grasp and critique social 
organization. In the sciences, Marcus (1995) focuses 
on the roles of scientists in developing “futures and 
future possibilities but the context is on the imagination 
in the scientific workplace, and the imagination’s aim 
and achievements are tied to forms of scientific 
production” (Jasanoff & Kim, 2015, p. 10). A broader 
approach, that places a stronger emphasis on a positive, 
normative stance toward what is desirable, addresses 
the persistence of multiple aspects of the world that can 
and should fit and maintain stability over long periods 
(Jasanoff & Kim, 2015; Taylor, 2004). The underlying 
ethos is that imaginaries encourage us to refuse to take 
“any aspect of the world for granted as natural or given, 
and hence foreclosed to investigation, even those that 
seem to hold still and do nothing; but instead to look 
around at all the compass points from which forces 
originate to make up reality as we see it.” (Jasanoff & 
Kim, 2015, p. 16). These socio-technical imaginaries 
are of a different form in that they open-up worlds for 
consideration rather than propositional statements 
about specific causal relationships or processes of the 
world. Moreover, the worldmaking aspects of 
imaginaries expand the epistemic reach of science 
beyond the disciplinary conditioning of established 
methods, theories, and paradigmatic boundaries of 
science (Kuhn, 1962). While such stabilization of 
accepted methods and disciplinary bounding is 
necessary for progress in science (Kuhn, 1963), 
paradigms also maintain certain choices and exclusions 
and determine what can be seen and what passes 
unremarked (Jasanoff & Kim, 2015). Thus, the form is 
a theoretical framework that brings together both 
technologically and culturally produced perceptions of 
the world (e.g., socio-technical; Sarker et al., 2019), 
and “offers an entry point into the means by which is 
and ought remain fitted together while our awareness 
of the world and what to make of it both move” 
(Jasanoff & Kim, 2015, p. 14). Speculative imaginaries 
highlight the coproduction of worlds by taking the 
admonition “nothing comes without its world” 
seriously. The recognition is that we do not “encounter 
single individuals, the meeting produces a world, 
changes the color of things, it diffracts more than it 
reflects […]. Knowing is not about prediction and 
control but about remaining ‘attentive to the unknown 
knocking at our door’ (Deleuze 1989, 193)” (de La 
Bellacasa, 2011, p. 91). 
Design is an inherently speculative activity that 
may be either truth-relevant or truth-irrelevant. In the 
former, paradigms such as Design Science Research 
(DSR) seek to create knowledge through the design, 
construction, and testing of artifacts. Claims about the 
artifacts are validated through the collection of 
evidence from a variety of tests (Larsen et al., 2020; 
Thakurta et al., 2017). Other forms, including 
speculative design (Drazin, 2012; Dunne & Raby, 
2013), critical design (Dunne, 2008; Malpass, 2017), 
and speculative geographies (Hovorka & Peter, 2021a; 
Peter et al., 2020; Ward, 2011), use design activities 
and artifacts as a means of entering into future design 
spaces, rather than creating future designs. These 
activities are not intended to predict or project what the 
technology design will become, but rather to gather 
impressions that may enable better design or to bring a 
critical view to current design assumptions. In addition, 
the DSR approach in IS credits Simon (1969) as 
providing the rationale for learning by creating an 
artifactual solution to a class of problems by focusing 
on one class of solutions from within the broader 
solution space. This has the effect of providing a 
solution to one specific problem while narrowing the 
possibilities for future action. Less often articulated are 
his views on social planning as “designing without 
final goals”. While paradoxical in comparison to the 
common perception in DSR as narrowing the design 
space to an artifactual problem solution, from this 
perspective on design, the “function is to motivate 
activity which in turn create new goals […]” (ibid, p. 
196) and a proliferation of niches and variety. Simon 
places his argument in the context of concerns with 
matters remote in time and space in which goals and 
opportunities evolve. Thus, sociotechnical planning 
(e.g., computational inter-connections of the world; 
city planning) require thinking of design and progress 
with a significant lengthening of our time perspective. 
In addressing social planning where society is the client 
being designed with, evolving, not fixed, systems are 
desirable and the essential task “is simply to keep open 
the options for the future or perhaps even broaden them 
a bit by creating new variety and new niches” (ibid, p. 
191). For example “toward the end of the twentieth 
century, the pioneers in ubicomp research tried to 
anticipate the impacts and applications of their 
technologies decades into the future” (Dourish & Bell, 
2011, p. 3). While the anticipations of these researchers 
were accurate in some respects, there were many 
aspects of the world that were not considered, in part, 
because they had not yet happened. In this way Dourish 
and Bell liken aspects of research to “the complex and 
somewhat mystical process of inquiring into future 
events […] looking to uncover what lies hidden from 
immediate sight (ibid, p. 2). 
This discussion reveals multiple forms of 
speculation as providing opportunities to expand the 
epistemic apparatus in different domains in IS research. 
The two broad forms, distinguished by their 
relationship to truth claims, each have a productive 
impact in progressing our knowledge of current and of 
future phenomenon. We observe that the initial and 
common definition of speculation are overly reliant on 
the possibility of evidentiary grounding. This 
limitation provides the basis of additional distinctions 
within speculation that emphasizes more imaginative 
forms which serve different functions.  
Page 6451
5 
4. Functions of Speculation 
A function-first account of speculation is a starting 
point for developing quality criteria for activities and 
outputs of this form of inquiry (Currie, 2021). Rather 
than characterising speculation in terms of its 
relationship to evidentiary support, a focus on 
functions makes visible how imagination is critical in 
scientific research and opens pathways toward 
broadening the apparatus through which knowledge is 
created.  
 
Truth-relevant 
speculation: 
Hypotheses, 
propositions, conjecture, and theories serve primarily 
epistemic functions (Currie, 2021). These can be 
briefly listed as: 
1. Explicating: a speculation makes a theory concrete 
and 
amenable 
to 
empirical 
tests. 
By 
operationalizing the speculation in the form of a 
hypothesis, the theory is made intelligible in the 
context of the assumed background knowledge. 
2. Scaffolding: through the articulation of hypotheses 
or propositions, speculation provides a platform—
a place to stand—in the structuring of empirical 
work (e.g., experimental design; field data 
collection; validation of claims regarding a 
designed artifact).  
3. Theory Building: speculation that is expressed as 
propositions and hypotheses provides formalization 
of theory which can, in turn, lead to deduction of 
additional hypotheses and testing. 
4. Linking: speculations can be used in connecting 
disparate bodies of knowledge. For example inter-
or transdisciplinary developments such as linkages 
between chemistry and biology (e.g., Darden & 
Maull, 1977) have been used to address 
phenomenon that neither discipline could address 
on its own.  
Taken together, we can observe that it is not the 
evidentiary support that is important to the epistemic 
functions but rather how these forms improve 
downstream science by generating (and testing) new 
ideas, opening new research areas, and bringing 
disparate bodies of knowledge together.  
 
Truth-irrelevant speculation: Speculations that are 
not intended to approximate truth can also be 
functionally beneficial. They provide additional 
benefits in: 
5. Staging: Forms such as metaphor “function as 
invitations from speaker to audience, writer to 
reader, to explore similarities between two things, 
phenomena, etc.” (Haack, 2019, p. 2064) and as 
such provide common language upon which 
research can be performed, communicated, and 
evaluated. For instance, user and system metaphors 
have been found to influence success in information 
system development (Hirschheim & Newman, 
1991; Kendall & Kendall, 1993). Maxwell’s 
imaginary fluid provided a starting point for 
research to develop the mathematics of electrical 
and magnetic laws. Evidence for such an imaginary 
fluid was irrelevant because the truth of the 
speculation is irrelevant (Achinstein, 2018). 
6. Critiquing present action: Social imaginaries and 
digital 
geographies 
envision 
alternative 
technocultural futures (e.g., Hovorka & Peter, 
2021a; Jasanoff & Kim, 2015; Mager & 
Katzenbach, 2021). In the design space, alternative 
designs (Dunne & Raby, 2013; Malpass, 2017; 
Rosner, 2018) can open lines of inquiry, scope the 
design space, and provoke debate on current 
practice. By making alternative futures legible, they 
serve to ground new concepts and vocabularies, 
posit new types of relationships (Frank, 2017, 2021; 
Hovorka & Peter, 2021b), and provide a framework 
for understanding and analysing the underlying 
present-day assumptions, beliefs, and values that 
shape our sociotechnical society. By uncovering 
and questioning our assumptions we can better 
understand the roles of current practices and 
theorizations in the making of worlds (Schultze, 
2017). 
As a final note, all forms of speculation rely on 
extra-epistemic factors. In addition to the ‘on-stage’ 
support provided through explicit evidence, there are 
numerous ‘off-stage’ practices and background 
knowledge that must be taken for granted (Achinstein, 
2018; Currie, 2021). These include experimental 
designs, instruments, methodologies, data-collection 
and analyses, as well as the institutional features of 
publication outlets and review practices (Currie, 2021). 
Thus, the emphasis on truth-relevant evidentiary 
support—that is, what counts as evidence and its 
production—reveals that “most scientific results are 
speculative to some extent” (Currie, 2021, p. 603). This 
suggests that emphasis on the productive functional 
accounts of speculation, rather than the reliance on 
evidentiary support is warranted. 
To take the socio-technical nexus of IS seriously 
(Sarker et al., 2019), we need to recognise that our 
research apparatus and claims about “proper” method 
have a historical context. That context sets the 
assumption that “social science tends to work on the 
assumption that the world is properly to be understood 
as a set of fairly specific, determinate, and more or less 
identifiable processes” (Law, 2004, p. 5). The desire to 
simplify the world, to reduce it to fundamental and 
graspable simplicity is a characteristic of much of 
social science that carries numerous implications. For 
example, taming the complexities that exist in the 
world-at-large may work well in a laboratory or small 
case study. But when problems at large scale are 
considered, the larger set of ongoing influences and 
relationships do not fit the schemes produced at smaller 
research scales. (Mol & Law, 2002). Rather than 
holding the technical as something unique and 
separate, we need a research apparatus that is capable 
of recognizing the technical as produced in relation to, 
Page 6452
6 
and along with social, political, environmental, 
economic, and cultural arrangements. This suggests a 
need for loosening our grasp on epistemic certainty and 
for creating a research apparatus that makes worlds 
visible as “a generative producer of realities” (Law, 
2004, p. 7).  
5. Futures: a Site of Speculative Inquiry 
Reviewing the scientific functions of speculation 
above leads us to observe that our sixth function—
critiquing present action—differs from the others in 
that it seeks to bridge a far greater epistemic distance 
than the others. In this, it serves a very particular 
function that we suggest is worthy of expanded 
development here: that of bringing into view 
alternative futures on their own terms, not merely as 
projections of the present/past into the future. This is 
an endeavour that intends to critically foreground 
present day commitments, assumptions, and activities 
by looking backwards in time from a speculative 
future. It is a form of speculation that provides the 
function of navigating the epistemic distance between 
the immediately observable present and as-of-yet 
unrealized enactments of future worlds and of 
providing critique of present-day research activity. 
This approach overcomes the limitations imposed by 
current language in conceptualizing new phenomenon 
and 
recognizes 
the 
contingencies 
of 
future 
technocultural enactments—the future could be 
otherwise (Frank, 2017).  
We begin our development with the assertion that 
the future is a contested space. It is viewed through 
multiple lenses for multiple purposes. Organizations 
want to manage their place in a largely unknown 
economic landscape of competition and customers. 
Technologists want to project technological influence 
and change what is possible into what is preferable. 
Policy makers and nation states have wide ranging 
interests from global-scale climate change and local 
impacts to economies of conflict to social conditions of 
a populace. There is a long history of futures studies 
that reveal current interest in accessing the future is 
grounded in a wide variety of approaches (Markus & 
Mentzer, 2014; Slaughter, 2021).  
A challenge from within the IS domain that 
provides illustration of this point is the conceptual 
frontier of “intelligent”, semi-autonomous systems 
working with humans. As the system itself “learns” 
from its interactions and has its own agency, it would 
not appear to be a case of a human worker merely using 
a system. But we currently lack the empirical basis for 
conceptualizing the human-machine relation (e.g., as a 
partnership, delegation, friend, colleague, co-author) 
(Baird & Maruping, 2021; Demetis & Lee, 2018; 
Grudin, 2017). Here, alternative worlds in which these 
possible relationships are explicated would enable 
discussion of when and where useful conceptual 
distinctions are made as this phenomena becomes 
prevalent (Frank, 2017; Hovorka & Peter, 2021b). In a 
similar fashion, alternative worlds would allow for 
critique of fashionable trends such as the addition of 
the label digital to traditional aspects of IS research—
such as, for example, “digital transformation” rather 
than just “IS-enabled organizational transformation.” 
Increasingly, arguments arise that question whether 
marking phenomena as digital is a distinction that will 
cease to make sense as more of the world is underlain 
with digital foundations. For example, Mueller et al. 
(2021) argue that many phenomena heralded as digital 
today will soon become mundane and everyday, such 
that any study of, for example, corporate digital 
responsibility as distinct from any other form of 
responsibility might no longer make sense (Mueller, 
2022). 
The plurality and uncertainty of post-digital futures 
is highlighted by Parmiggiani et al. (2020) who suggest 
that many such futures are likely not mere 
extrapolations or projection based on today. We cannot 
take the trajectories of the past decades for granted, 
especially when post-digital futures will not be merely 
technological landscapes, but will be lived worlds with 
social, political, cultural, and environmental facets too. 
In light of challenges like this, the function of 
speculation is to enable critique because “we are 
concerned with the future because securing a 
satisfactory future may require actions in the present” 
(Simon, 1969, p. 184). For instance, and in contrast to 
projections or predictions of futures that are focused on 
specific technological enactments, an alternative 
epistemic approach such as speculative geographies 
enable forays into futures as a site of critical inquiry 
(Hovorka & Peter, 2021a). A key characteristic of 
speculative geographies is that they speculate inhabited 
worlds (Hovorka & Peter, 2021a). In many existing 
types of futures-studies (e.g., Markus & Mentzer, 
2014), the technological landscape is projected to 
change but social aspects are ceteris paribus. The 
futures implied in these academic narratives tend to 
focus on technological or industry aspects and do not 
disclose the lived-experience of human or more-than-
human inhabitants of those futures. The result is often 
a paradoxical illusion of infinite technological 
expansion while simultaneously narrowing cultural 
visions of futures (Appadurai, 2019). For example, 
power relations and structures of employment, what it 
is to be human working with artificial intelligence 
machines, environmental conditions or what counts as 
knowledge are assumed as self-evident and are thus not 
problematic. Yet our interest in technological change is 
not for its own sake but the betterment of human and 
environmental conditions. What is needed here are new 
approaches that make visible the technocultural 
elements—how our present research will bequeath 
politics, economies, cultures, social relations, and 
environmental concerns onto our descendants. 
There are two specific characteristics of such forays 
that have not been previously articulated but which are 
important if they seek to meaningfully critique present 
action; that is, serve their epistemic function. First, 
Page 6453
7 
forays into richly inhabited future(s) position 
imagination as organized work within research 
practices (Jasanoff & Kim, 2015) rather than as an 
opposition to ‘scientific approaches’, unserious or 
unproductive (Currie, 2021). In this way imagination, 
expectations, and imaginaries are revealed as 
legitimate approaches to connecting technology with 
the production of social order, distributions of power, 
environmental concerns, and a shared sense of ethics 
(Jasanoff & Kim, 2015). Second, by refuting the 
narrative that phenomena are simple and that epistemic 
simplicity and certainty is a virtue (Achinstein, 2018; 
Mol & Law, 2002), speculating alternative futures 
expands phenomena to scale, includes spatial 
differentiation (Haj-bolouri et al., forthcoming), and 
provides an approach to overcoming epistemic 
distance (Carolan, 2004). By foregrounding the messy 
complexity of inhabited worlds, we make visible the 
contingent commitments of present action. The 
dichotomous prioritization of the technological over 
the social, and the digital as a substitute for the real 
obscures the tightly integrated coproduction of 
present/future 
worlds. 
These 
forays 
focus 
on 
developing the categories with which to think worlds. 
6. Quality Criteria for Speculation  
Although the term speculation infrequently appears 
in the scientific literature, we have demonstrated that 
imaginative speculations are common in the sciences. 
Moving forward, we propose that establishing an 
approach to assessing the quality of speculations is 
critical if we are to add it to the epistemic apparatus in 
IS research.  
A first step to quality assessment is attending to its 
epistemic function. As noted, speculation may be 
mobilized to develop new research studies, expand 
conceptual machinery (e.g., theories, new conceptual 
language, alternative worlds) or hypotheses, or to 
provide linages among existing bodies of knowledge. 
Speculation can explicate theories and provide 
possibility proofs. These are very different epistemic 
situations that require crafting the speculation to meet 
the intended situation. A speculation regarding a new 
theory would take a form different from the explication 
of an existing theory. A speculative digital geography 
of futures addresses a very different epistemic distance 
from a speculative explication of specific hypotheses 
of an existing phenomenon. Each of these examples 
could be evaluated as fruitful or productive of new 
thinking that advances research but would do so on a 
very different basis. 
Secondly, the specific domain of research will 
guide quality evaluations. For example in a design 
context where a new phenomenon is being created, a 
design speculation can be assessed in relation to what 
it reveals about the taken-for-granted assumptions of 
both the designer and of the person participating in the 
design process (Dunne & Raby, 2013; Rosner, 2018). 
Setting industrial design (e.g., commercially oriented 
and produced with a market orientation) as the contrast 
class, a knowledge-creation design orientation “acts as 
a form of critique and argument […] established 
through the design of objects and the communication 
of an objects narratives of use” (Malpass, 2017, p. 1). 
There are many ways in which speculation can be 
legitimately criticized. For example, hypotheses may 
be presented in the wrong functional context (e.g., if it 
is incorrectly inferred that it is truth-relevant and thus 
subjected to evidentiary support when it should be 
understood on the basis of a productive linking of 
research domains). To strengthen the concept of 
productive speculation will require that the IS field 
relinquishes its grip on empiricism and is willing to 
acknowledge informed, critical engagement. A deeper 
understanding of the forms and functions of 
speculation will reduce the tendency to confuse 
scientific speculation with statements of fact (Currie, 
2021). 
We have established that speculation is a key aspect 
of knowledge creation, and we acknowledge that 
relinquishing the reassuring assumptions of empiricism 
will not be easy. A key ingredient in this process of 
establishing the legitimacy of speculation in our 
scholarly debate will be a discourse on establishing 
quality criteria. As a start to this discourse, we propose 
three quality criteria for scientific speculation: 
1. Identify epistemic function: for differing epistemic 
situations, speculations may be supported by 
evidence. In other situations, they expand research 
studies, enable new conceptual machinery, or link 
disparate bodies of knowledge. Accordingly, 
researchers employing speculation should seek to 
identify the specific epistemic function of their 
speculation. Our earlier discussion provides a first 
list of relevant functions and can thus help to 
explicate a speculation’s specific purpose it must be 
evaluated against. 
2. Establish fit in domain of research: suitability of 
the speculation for the intended purpose in the 
research domain. These include but are not limited 
to, for example, assessing a truth-claim regarding a 
theory or hypothesis or foregrounding taken-for-
granted assumptions in design. Similar to the first 
quality criterion we suggest above, this second 
criterion serves as a form of discursive signpost that 
helps readers and reviewers to appropriately 
interpret the speculation vis-à-vis the current 
discourse. 
3. Provide critique: the ability of speculations to 
foreground the genealogy of knowledge, power 
structures, images of humanity, spatial and 
temporal distribution, and the epistemic rules of 
research itself enable surfacing the assumptions 
underlying the way knowledge is produced, 
maintained and distributed. This third criterion help 
to highlight the value of a speculation a researcher 
engages in, specifically in contrast to other, more 
conventional methods of inquiry. This criterion 
should also be seen as an encouragement to 
Page 6454
8 
critically engage not only with the subject matter of 
the speculation, but of the research apparatus itself. 
That is, speculating researchers should reflect on 
why speculation as a tool is needed and why more 
conventional approaches cannot yield the insights 
their present study contributes. 
Clearly, the three criteria we propose here are but 
an initial impulse for the discussion how speculation is 
evaluated as a step towards greater recognition and 
inclusion as an addition to the research apparatus in IS 
research. The development of a full set of such criteria 
and their gradual refinement, however, are beyond the 
scope of our work here for two reasons. First, 
especially the refinement of these criteria is an activity 
for which we, as a discipline, will need a richer set of 
contributions that rely on speculation to assess their 
quality. Second, quality of studies is not an absolute, 
objective fact easily measured with some instrument, 
but must be seen as a function of a discourse process in 
science (see Hovorka in Bichler et al., 2016). 
In the long run, we envision that further engaging 
with the forms and function of speculation in our 
research will help the IS community to better grasp 
what Weick (1989) described as “disciplined 
imagination.” Specifically, a debate on quality criteria 
for speculation as a form of such disciplined 
imagination will play a crucial role—similar to what 
Lee (1991) has done for qualitative research or what 
Hevner et al. (2004) have done for design science 
research—in our discipline’s progress toward a richer 
research apparatus. 
7. Conclusions  
In this work, we have argued that speculation is a 
fundamental activity and productive object in scientific 
research. The IS field’s focus on empirical research, on 
theory development, and on theory testing obscures 
and diminishes the forms and functions imagination 
and speculation have in research. By identifying these 
forms, we seek to legitimize and strengthen 
imagination and speculation as a fruitful activity and as 
an object of scrutiny in IS research. 
This is not to suggest that speculation is always 
needed, or productive. But multiple forms of 
speculation provide valuable functions to a greater 
degree than derogatory accounts of speculation 
acknowledge. In offering a broader conception of 
speculation than is commonly recognized, we seek to 
expand the epistemic apparatus available in IS. In its 
common forms, researchers speculate prior to seeking 
evidentiary support. But the functions of speculation 
are not limited to the relation of speculation to 
evidence. In the case of design, speculation can enable 
transformation through the refinement of designed 
artifacts and systems. Through the use of alternative 
worlds, such as digital geographies, researchers can 
return inhabitants of futures to the concerns our present 
day activities should have for them. In doing so we can 
develop new relationships to futures and create new 
epistemic and axiological ways for futures to be 
accepted, produced, or performed. In the future, by 
legitimizing speculation and imagination in IS 
research, we seek to open a pathway to new forms of 
speculative research apparatuses. Specifically, we offer 
imaginative alternative futures not as a prediction or 
articulation 
of 
desirable 
futures 
but 
as 
acknowledgement of the messiness and multiplicity of 
lived worlds and as an approach for critically 
appraising current research activities. Just as future 
worlds are contingent, our current research activities, 
discursive spaces, conceptualizations, and theories are 
also contingent. Our current research apparatus and 
research foci could be otherwise. In this way, the future 
is disclosed as “a profoundly vital component of the 
present (however defined) or, more fundamentally, a 
principle of present action” (Slaughter, 1998, p. 372). 
As a foray into alternative futures, speculative 
approaches such as digital geographies begin a process 
of laying out spaces that function as critique as we walk 
through them. These possible critiques reveal a 
multiplicity in the way futures are ordered, the logics 
from which they emerge and the material and 
discursive practices through which the future is 
intimately connected to present action. 
8. References 
Achinstein, P. (2001). The book of evidence. Oxford 
University Press.  
Achinstein, P. (2018). Speculation: Within and about 
Science. Oxford University Press.  
Appadurai, A. (2019). The Scarcity of Social Futures 
in the Digital Era. In Futures.  
Asimov, I. (2004). I, Robot [1950]. Bantam Dell, New 
York. 
Baird, A., & Maruping, L. M. (2021). The next 
Generation of Research on IS Use: a Theoretical 
Framework of Delegation to and from Agentic IS 
Artifacts. MIS Quarterly, 45(1), 315-341. 
Bichler, M., Frank, U., Avison, D., Malaurent, J., 
Fettke, P., Hovorka, D., Krämer, J., Schnurr, D., 
Mueller, B., Suhl, L., & Thalheim, B. (2016). 
Theories in Business and Information Systems 
Engineering. Business & Information Systems 
Engineering, 58(4), 291-319. 
Brown, T. L. (2003). Making Truth: Metaphor In 
Science. University of Chicago Press.  
Carolan, M. S. (2004). Ontological politics: mapping a 
complex environmental problem. Environmental 
values, 497-522. 
Chandler, J. K., Davidson, A. I., & Harootunian, H. D. 
(1994). Questions of evidence: Proof, practice, and 
persuasion across the disciplines. 
Cohen, D. H. (1998). If, what-if, and so-what: Mixing 
metaphors, conditionals, and philosophy. The 
Paideia Archive: Twentieth World Congress of 
Philosophy,  
Currie, A. (2021). Science & speculation. Erkenntnis, 
1-23. 
Page 6455
9 
Darden, L., & Maull, N. (1977). Interfield Theories. 
Philosophy of science, 44, 43-64. 
de La Bellacasa, M. P. (2011). Matters of care in 
technoscience: Assembling neglected things. Social 
studies of science, 41(1), 85-106. 
Demetis, D., & Lee, A. S. (2018). When humans using 
the IT artifact becomes IT using the human artifact. 
Journal of the Association for Information Systems, 
19(10), 5. 
Dourish, P., & Bell, G. (2011). Divining a digital 
future: Mess and mythology in ubiquitous 
computing. Mit Press.  
Drazin, A. (2012). Design anthropology: Working on, 
with 
and 
for 
digital 
technologies. 
Digital 
Anthropology, 245-265. 
Dunne, A. (2008). Hertzian tales: Electronic products, 
aesthetic experience, and critical design Royal 
College of Art].  
Dunne, A., & Raby, F. (2013). Speculative everything: 
design, fiction, and social dreaming. MIT Press.  
Frank, U. (2017). Theories in the light of contingency 
and change: possible future worlds and well-
grounded hope as a supplement to truth. 
Proceedings of the 50th Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences,  
Frank, U. (2021). Language, Change, and Possible 
Worlds. Crisis and Critique: Philosophical Analysis 
and Current Events: Proceedings of the 42nd 
International Ludwig Wittgenstein Symposium,  
Friedman, B., & Hendry, D. G. (2019). Value sensitive 
design: 
Shaping 
technology 
with 
moral 
imagination. Mit Press.  
Grudin, J. (2017). From tool to partner: The evolution 
of human-computer interaction. Synthesis Lectures 
on Human-Centered Interaction, 10(1), i-183. 
Haack, S. (2019). The art of scientific metaphors. 
Revista portuguesa de filosofia, 75(Fasc. 4), 2049-
2066. 
Haj-bolouri, 
A., 
Conboy, 
K., 
& 
Gregor, 
S. 
(forthcoming). An Encompassing Framework for 
Conceptualizing Space in Information Systems: 
Philosophical Perspectives, Themes, and Concepts. 
Journal of the Association of Information Systems. 
Hassan, N. R., Lowry, P. B., & Mathiassen, L. (2022). 
Useful 
Products 
in 
Information 
Systems 
Theorizing: A Discursive Formation Perspective. 
Journal of the Association for Information Systems, 
23(2), 418-446. 
Hevner, A. R., March, S. T., Park, J., & Ram, S. (2004). 
Design Science in Information Systems Research. 
MIS Quarterly, 28(1), 75-105. 
Hirschheim, R., & Newman, M. (1991). Symbolism 
and Information Systems Development: Myth, 
Metaphor 
and 
Magic. 
Information 
Systems 
Research, 2(1), 29-62. 
Holton, G. J. (1998). The scientific imagination: with a 
new introduction. Harvard University Press.  
Hovorka, D. S., & Peter, S. (2021a). Research 
Perspectives: From Other Worlds: Speculative 
Engagement Through Digital Geographies. Journal 
of the Association for Information Systems, 22(6), 
1736-1752. 
Hovorka, D. S., & Peter, S. (2021b). Speculatively 
Engaging Future(s): Four Theses. Management 
Information Systems Quarterly, 45(1), 461-466. 
Huxley, A. (2004). A Brave New World: Revisted. 
Vintage Books.  
Ingold, T. (2021). Imagining for Real: Essays on 
Creation, 
Attention 
and 
Correspondence. 
Routledge.  
Jasanoff, S., & Kim, S. H. (2015). Dreamscapes of 
modernity: Sociotechnical imaginaries and the 
fabrication of power. University of Chicago Press.  
Kaplan, E. K. (1972). Gaston Bachelard's philosophy 
of imagination: An introduction. Philosophy and 
phenomenological research, 33(1), 1-24. 
Kendall, J. E., & Kendall, K. E. (1993). Metaphors and 
methodologies: 
Living 
beyond 
the 
systems 
machine. MIS quarterly, 149-171. 
Kind, A. (Ed.). (2018). How imagination gives rise to 
knowledge. Oxford University Press.  
Kuhn, T. S. (1962). The Structure of Scientific 
Revolutions (3rd ed.). University of Chicago Press.  
Kuhn, T. S. (1963). The function of dogma in scientific 
research. In A. C. Crombie (Ed.), Scientific Change 
Historical Studies in the Intellectual, Social and 
Technical Conditions for Scientific Discovery and 
Technical Invention, From Antiquity to the Present: 
Symposium on the History of Science, University of 
Oxford, 9-15 July 1961.". Heineman Educational 
Books.  
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors We Live 
By. University of Chicago Press.  
Larsen, K. R., Lukyanenko, R., Mueller, R. M., Storey, 
V. C., VanderMeer, D., Parsons, J., & Hovorka, D. 
S. (2020). Validity in design science research. 
International Conference on Design Science 
Research in Information Systems and Technology,  
Law, J. (2004). After method: Mess in social science 
research. Routledge.  
Leclercq-Vandelannoitte, A., Isaac, H., & Kalika, M. 
(2014). 
Mobile 
information 
systems 
and 
organisational control: beyond the panopticon 
metaphor? European Journal of Information 
Systems, 23(5), 543-557. 
Lee, A. S. (1991). INTEGRATING POSITIVIST AND 
INTERPRETIVE 
APPROACHES 
TO 
ORGANIZATIONAL RESEARCH. Organization 
Science, 2(4), 342-365. 
Lennon, K. (2015). Imagination and the Imaginary. 
Routledge.  
Levy, A., & Godfrey-Smith, P. (2019). The scientific 
imagination. Oxford University Press.  
Mager, A., & Katzenbach, C. (2021). Future 
imaginaries in the making and governing of digital 
technology: Multiple, contested, commodified. 
New Media & Society, 23(2), 223-236. 
Malpass, M. (2017). Critical design in context: 
History, theory, and practices. Bloomsbury 
Publishing.  
Page 6456
10 
Marcus, G. E. (1995). Technoscientific imaginaries: 
Conversations, profiles, and memoirs (Vol. 2). 
University of Chicago Press.  
Markus, M. L., & Mentzer, K. (2014). Foresight for a 
responsible future with ICT. Information Systems 
Frontiers, 16(3), 353-368. 
Mol, A., & Law, J. (2002). Complexities: an 
introduction. In Complexities (pp. 1-23). Duke 
University Press.  
Mueller, B. (2022). Corporate Digital Responsibility. 
Business and Information Systems Engineering, 
64(5), 689-700. 
Mueller, B., Diefenbach, S., Dobusch, L., & Baer, K. 
(2021). From Becoming to Being Digital: The 
Emergence and Nature of the Post-Digital. i-com, 
20(3), 319-328. 
Murphy, A. (2022). Imagination in science. Philosophy 
Compass, 17(6), e12836. 
Parmiggiani, E., Teracino, E. A., Huysman, M., Jones, 
M., Mueller, B., & Mikalsen, M. (2020). OASIS 
2019 Panel Report: A Glimpse at the ‘Post-Digital’. 
Communications of the Association for Information 
Systems, 47, 583-596. 
Peter, S., Riemer, K., & Hovorka, D. S. (2020). 
Artefacts from the Future - Engaging Audiences in 
Possible Futures with Emerging Technologies for 
Better 
Outcomes 
Twenty-Eighth 
European 
Conference on Information Systems, Marrakesh, 
Morocco. 
Poole, M. S., Van de Ven, A. H., Dooley, K. J., & 
Holmes, M. (2000). A Typology of Process 
Theories. In M. S. Poole, A. H. Van de Ven, K. J. 
Dooley, & M. Holmes (Eds.), Organizational 
Change and Innovation Processes: Theory and 
Methods for Research (pp. 56-88). Oxford, UK.  
Poon, P., & Wagner, C. (2001). Critical success factors 
revisited: success and failure cases of information 
systems for senior executives. Decision Support 
Systems, 30(4), 393-418. 
Popper, K. (1959). The Logic of Scientific Discovery. 
Routledge.  
Rogers, G. (2021). Speculation: A Cultural History 
from Aristotle to AI. Columbia University Press.  
Rosner, D. K. (2018). Critical fabulations: Reworking 
the methods and margins of design. MIT Press.  
Rubinstein, I. S., & Good, N. (2013). Privacy by 
design: A counterfactual analysis of Google and 
Facebook privacy incidents. Berkeley Tech. LJ, 28, 
1333. 
Sarker, S., Chatterjee, S., Xiao, X., & Elbanna, A. 
(2019). The Sociotechnical Axis of Cohesion for 
the IS Discipline: Its Historical Legacy and its 
Continued Relevance. MIS quarterly, 43(3), 695-
719. 
Schön, D. A. (1993). Generative metaphor: A 
perspective on problem-setting in social policy. 
Schultze, U. (2017). What kind of world do we want to 
help make with our theories? Information and 
Organization, 27(1), 60-66. 
Schultze, U., & Orlikowski, W. J. (2001). Metaphors 
of virtuality: shaping an emergent reality. 
Information and Organization, 11(1), 45-77. 
Shelley, M. (2018, 1818). Frankenstein: The 1818 
Text. Penguin Classics.  
Simon, H. A. (1969). Social planning: Designing the 
evolving artifact. In The Sciences of the Artifical 
(pp. 139-167). MIT Press.  
Slaughter, R. A. (1998). Futures studies as an 
intellectual and applied discipline. American 
Behavioral Scientist, 42(3), 372-385. 
Slaughter, R. A. (2021). Stumbling towards the light: 
Four decades of a life in futures. Futures, 132, 
102794. 
Sullivan, R., Hannon, O., & Hovorka, D. S. (2023). 
Embracing Absence: Researching What is Not 
There International Conference on Information 
Systems, Hyderabad, India. 
Swedberg, R. (2021). Does speculation belong in social 
science 
research? 
Sociological 
Methods 
& 
Research, 50(1), 45-74. 
Taylor, C. (2004). Modern social imaginaries. Duke 
University Press.  
Taylor, C., & Dewsbury, B. M. (2018). On the problem 
and promise of metaphor use in science and science 
communication. Journal of microbiology & biology 
education, 19(1), 19.11. 40. 
Thakurta, R., Mueller, B., Ahlemann, F., & Hoffman, 
D. (2017, January 4-7). The State of Design – A 
Comprehensive Literature Review to Chart the 
Design Science Research Discourse 50. Hawaii 
International Conference on System Science 
(HICSS 2017), Waikoloa, HI, USA. 
Trice, H. M., & Beyer, J. M. (1984). Studying 
Organizational Cultures Through Rites and 
Ceremonials. Academy of Management Review, 
9(4), 653-669. 
Ward, M. (2011). Souvenirs from the Future: The Role 
of Image Making in Speculative and Critical 
Design. 
Weick, K. E. (1989). Theory construction as 
disciplined imagination. Academy of Management 
Review, 14(4), 516-531. 
Weick, K. E. (2006). The role of imagination in the 
organizing of knowledge. European Journal of 
Information Systems, 15, 446-452. 
 
Page 6457
