When happy accidents spark creativity:
Bringing collaborative speculation to life with generative AI
Ziv Epstein1*, Hope Schroeder1*, Dava Newman1,2
1MIT Media Lab
2Human Systems Laboratory, Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics, MIT
{zive, hopes, dnewman}@mit.edu
*These authors contributed equally
Abstract
Generative AI techniques like those that synthesize im-
ages from text (text-to-image models) offer new possi-
bilities for creatively imagining new ideas. We inves-
tigate the capabilities of these models to help commu-
nities engage in conversations about their collective fu-
ture. In particular, we design and deploy a facilitated ex-
perience where participants collaboratively speculate on
utopias they want to see, and then produce AI-generated
imagery from those speculations. In a series of in-depth
user interviews, we invite participants to reﬂect on the
generated images and reﬁne their visions for the future.
We synthesize ﬁndings with a bespoke community zine
on the experience. We observe that participants often
generated ideas for implementing their vision and drew
new lateral considerations as a result of viewing the gen-
erated images. Critically, we ﬁnd that the unexpected
difference between the participant’s imagined output
and the generated image is what facilitated new insight
for the participant. We hope our experimental model
for co-creation, computational creativity, and commu-
nity reﬂection inspires the use of generative models to
help communities and organizations envision better fu-
tures.
Introduction
New methods in generative machine learning, such as
GANs, have created an explosion of opportunities and pos-
sibilities for computational creativity. One possibility GANs
afford is the empowerment of people in casual creation
(Compton and Mateas, 2015; Epstein et al., 2020a; Berns
and Colton, 2020). For such casual creation, text-to-image
models built on technologies like CLIP (Radford et al.,
2021) have enormous promise by providing people an in-
tuitive and user-friendly possibility space to query GAN-
generated images via prompts (see Colton et al. (2021) for an
overview). With such a technology, what are the possibilities
for human creativity, and how might these applications im-
pact communities? One opportunity for these text-to-image
models is to aid in imaginative idea visualization (Colton
et al., 2021) as a way to bootstrap the creative process. An
issue of particular relevance to this goal is the inherent va-
riety/ﬁdelity trade-off of generative models: as the outputs
of models become more realistic, they become less diverse
(Ramesh et al., 2022). Yet it remains unclear how this trade-
off impacts downstream tasks like imaginative idea visual-
ization. On one hand, high-ﬁdelity outputs might provide
helpful details for how a given idea might be actually im-
plemented. On the other, “happy accidents” from diverse
but low-ﬁdelity outputs might help evolve an idea via lateral
thinking.
To explore how these two possibilities trade off, we de-
sign, deploy, and evaluate a computational creativity system
for imagining and visualizing new ideas. Participants collab-
oratively speculated on utopian ideas for the future. These
speculations were then fed as text prompts into a generative
AI model to visually manifest them. We conducted a series
of user interviews to learn about the experience from par-
ticipants, and surface key themes. In this paper, we present
a ﬁeld report of the experience and use the system to trace
broader questions about the social and collaborative aspects
of creativity, such as when generative visual imagery can
inspire ideas about the future, and how the variety/ﬁdelity
trade-off in generative models might impact creativity. Our
work builds on previous work (Rafner et al., 2021, 2020)
which builds tools for people to express both hope and anx-
iety for the future via blending with generative models, and
investigates image features associated with dystopian versus
utopian visions of the future.
This work builds on the tradition of speculative design and
design ﬁction, which use design to imagine and prototype al-
ternative worlds (Dunne and Raby, 2013). The social nature
of the collaborative speculation allows individuals to build
these alternative worlds together. Furthermore, it explores
how organizations or communities could use speculative de-
sign and design ﬁction to chart a course for the future.
There are several key contributions in this ﬁeld report.
First, we introduce a novel approach to prompt engineering,
which leverages collaborative speculation from a facilitated
co-design experience, rather than a single individual sourc-
ing the prompts. Second, we highlight the importance of
high-variance, low-ﬁdelity images in inducing creative in-
sights. Finally, we highlight the potential for computational
creativity to aid in community dialogue and the collective
elicitation of an organization’s values. We explore this pos-
sibility by creating a zine to document and synthesize the
ﬁndings, which we then present back to the community.
arXiv:2206.00533v2  [cs.HC]  17 Jun 2022
Methods
On October 8th, 2021, we organized a facilitated co-design
experience at a solarpunk1-themed event at the MIT Media
Lab, which had over 400 RSVPs. Participants in the exercise
paired up and responded to the following prompt: “How will
we re-imagine the following categories in utopia? Team up
with someone, and each pick one of the following sectors:
(see Table 1). Brainstorm how the future could be better at
their intersection! Pick up a leaf and write your vision down
on it. Add any visual representation you want. Tape the
leaves to a stalk, add a ﬂower, and put them in the solarpunk
garden together!”
Money
Medicine
Cities
Transportation
Space
Agriculture
Music
Environment
Economy
Relationships
Family
Healthcare
Arts
Civil rights
Fashion
Infrastructure
Trade
Social justice
Oceans
Natural land & Wildlife
Education
Government
Energy
Community
Table 1: The 20 sectors used for prompt generation. Pairs of
participants picked two to blend.
After co-creating their visions, participants placed their
ﬂowers with the vision written on it in the solarpunk garden
(Figure 1). A total of 32 visions of the future were co-
created by over 64 participants.
Figure 1: Solarpunk garden where participants placed their
written visions. The garden was conceptualized as a “seed
vault,” a place for hopeful seeds for the future to be stored
and preserved.
Next, we took the 32 visions, and ran them through VQ-
GAN+CLIP, a common model of text-to-image synthesis.
This produced visual representations of the participants’ vi-
sions, and served as the output of the speculation experience.
We then used these images for evaluation of the paradigm
and incorporated them into a zine for additional community
impact.
Evaluation via user interviews
To evaluate the expe-
rience of facilitated speculation augmented with genera-
tive AI, we conducted a series of ten 15-20 minute semi-
structured interviews from March 30th to April 11th, 2022
about 10 unique visions both in person and by video chat.
1Solarpunk is an artform and aesthetic that imagines near-
distant futures where humans have become climate change-
resilient and learned to live in harmony with nature.
First, to measure relatedness between prompt and image,
we tested if participants could recognize the image gener-
ated by their prompt. For each participant, we paired the im-
age that corresponded to their prompt with three additional
images from other prompts and presented the set of four to
the participant in random order. We invited participants to
identify the image generated from the prompt they wrote in
the original activity. Regardless of their answer, we then re-
vealed the correct image. We then asked questions related to
their interpretation of the image, starting by asking them to
describe what they saw. Based on directions from this ini-
tial description, we then asked follow-up questions about if
and how the image differed from their expectations. Finally,
we asked if the participant had ideas for a follow-up prompt
that better reﬂected their vision. After interviews were com-
plete, we coded them using standard qualitative coding prac-
tices for themes that emerged across conversations (Salda˜na,
2013) .
Results
While all loosely related to the solarpunk theme, the written
prompts from participants in the original activity had a re-
markable amount of diversity. Some participants generated
futuristic ideas, while others called for a return to traditional
wisdom or practices. Four exemplary images, with their cor-
responding prompts are shown in Figure 2.
User Interviews
We conducted 10 interviews with indi-
viduals who participated in the original activity. We focused
our interviews to participants who remembered the conver-
sation they had from several months prior and still recalled
the vision that they wrote down.
We coded our 10 participant interviews for major themes
distilled through repeated interviewing. In the process of
synthesizing recurring themes across conversations, we no-
ticed that many participants gleaned new insight as a result
of viewing the image. We recorded when participants men-
tioned new information gleaned about their original idea af-
ter viewing the generated image. A majority of participants
reported gaining new ideas as a result of viewing the image
generated by their prompt, and this new information fell into
two main categories.
The ﬁrst was the emergence of new, unexpected ideas
for implementing the vision they had written (40% of inter-
views, n = 4). For example, the creator of the prompt “Bio-
philic vertical gardens lining neighborhood roads, creating
function and beautiful public spaces” already had a “pretty
concrete” image of what their vision could look like given
that biophilic community gardens already exist. However,
they had imagined “pumps and tubes” as a visual feature
given the complex engineering required to create such gar-
dens. When viewing the generated image, the creator noted
that the wall looked like it was made of a “natural, rocky
substrate” rather than one with exposed hydroponic engi-
neering (see Figure 2, left). This lead the participant to note
that perhaps the wall of the garden could in fact be beauti-
ful and natural-looking as well as functional, and that this
aesthetic would be an improvement over exposed pipes.
The second main area of insight participants reported in
Figure 2: Four images from the following prompts: Biophilic vertical gardens lining neighborhood roads, creating function
and beautiful public spaces (left), Public spaces: solidarity-building. The intersection of oceans and relationships. Publicly
accessible oceanic vistas (center left), Holistic traditional medicine as an art form (center right), Dye the ocean purple to
prevent global warming (right)
interviews related to generating unexpected connections be-
tween a vision and lateral concepts (40%, n = 4). For ex-
ample, the prompt “Public spaces: solidarity-building. The
intersection of oceans and relationships. Publicly accessible
oceanic vistas” generated an image of humans on a beach
(see Figure 2, center left). Something like sand is present,
but the lack of an actual ocean in the image was surprising to
the prompt’s creator. However, the repeated visual motif of
people in relationship yielded a new perspective for the cre-
ator, who then reﬂected on the importance of relationship for
organizing in public space. This was not a framing he had
not been considering as central to this prompt before being
presented with the image. The lack of ocean in an image
generated from a prompt with two references to the ocean
could be considered low-ﬁdelity and ultimately undesirable
behavior from VQGAN+CLIP. Yet the unexpectedness of
the image led the prompt’s creator in a new direction that
was ultimately valuable for ideation. As a result, we con-
sider this a happy accident in the context of this exercise in
social dreaming.
In another example, the participant who wrote “Holistic
traditional medicine as an art form” reported noticing the
centrality of hands as a visual motif in the image (see Figure
2, center right). Her interpretation was that the hands made
the image “focused on the making process” and that the im-
age “emphasizes labor.” She reported that the human labor
aspect behind traditional medicine was not a major associa-
tion she had with the topic before viewing the image.
Most (80%, n = 8) interviewees mentioned at least one
idea for a follow-up prompt to reﬁne the image or clarify
their vision. For example, the biophilic garden image fea-
tured a visual element on the bottom left that looked like
a road.
The prompt’s creator noticed the curb and said
they might use language like “neighborhood path” instead
of “road” to generate an image with explicitly pedestrian
streets in the future.
Despite the fact that it was easy for participants to identify
the image created from their prompt (90%, n = 9) out of a
set of random images, most participants interpreted the gen-
erated images as being either partly or substantially different
from what they imagined prior to seeing the image (70%, n
= 7). Three interviewees that did not gain any new insight
from viewing the images were concerned that the image was
too abstract to be useful. On the other hand, two other par-
ticipants commented that they speciﬁcally appreciated the
“whimsical” image of a technical concept.
“When the place inspires the zine inspires the place”2
In the wake of the solarpunk event, we created a zine outlin-
ing the project and showcasing all the co-written visions and
corresponding GAN images to aid in community reﬂection
(see Figure 3). We printed over 500 copies and distributed
them to community stakeholders. As community members,
we wanted to give these images back to the community, hop-
ing they would act as a mirror for additional conversation
and “close the loop” of the reﬂective process.
The event, co-creation experience, and zine all came at a
time when our organization was emerging from the throes
of the pandemic and actively setting its strategy and vision
for the next decade and beyond. At such a critical inﬂection
point, the combination of these three elements had several
key cultural impacts. First, there was the physical aspect of
people coming together to imagine and plant the seeds for
the future after a long period of pandemic-induced isolation.
Second, in an organization with varied interests and prior-
ities, the process of brainstorming through images helped
visualize and synthesize collective threads across the orga-
nization. Finally, cementing the images in familiar, tangible
form of printed media provided a snapshot for both dissemi-
nating the outputs and orienting discussion around the orga-
nization’s future (P´erez y P´erez and Ackerman, 2020). The
zine has since been used to communicate interests and pri-
orities to both visitors and external stakeholders.
Discussion
Initially, we predicted a main contribution of this work
would be designing a tool to concretize visions that teams
co-created. We found that occasionally the image did mean-
ingfully crystallize a vision for the future in a literal way,
2Quote by Sidebody https://www.instagram.com/p/
CbtJnWlloui/
Co-creating 
Utopias
EDITORS NOTE
ese AI-generated speculations from the 2021 
party ended up being remarkably prescient, aligning 
with many of the solarpunk breakthroughs of the 
past century. As sea levels rose, urban planners in 
the early 2030’s used the newly created oceanfront 
space as adaptive sites for solidarity building and 
processing climate-related trauma. Also, one cannot 
fail to see the similiarities with the the great 
purple-iron sea fertilization of 2037, which restored 
phytoplankton levels and the whale population to 
historic levels. ere also seems to be the 
forecasting of the dance powered transit of 
UnceUnceRails in 2039, which oﬀered a new energy 
source derived from human sweat and good vibes. 
mycelial network  online
Public spaces: 
solidarity-building. e 
intersection of oceans and 
relationships. Publicity-- 
accessible oceanic vistas.
Dye the ocean purple to 
prevent global warming
29
Learning about 
ﬁnal frontiers 
(ocean & space) by living in 
them
“It's the year 2100. e climate apocalypse 
already happened and we need to start over 
living in harmony with nature. Your mission 
tonight: you must approach the seed vault. 
You will use what you ﬁnd there to plant in 
the solarpunk garden and help reboot 
humanity.”
Visitors were welcomed to the 99F solarpunk utopia with these 
words. rough the evening,  dozens made pilgrimage to the seed 
vault, a display drawing on the visual language and concept from 
the Svalbard Global Seed Vault founded in the early 2000’s. 
Our motivation: if you were granted the challenge and 
opportunity to reboot humanity, what seeds would you plant? 
Attendees of 99F communed in an exercise to co-envision our 
future at the seed vault. eir mission: work with a partner to 
combine disparate ﬁelds and co-create a better vision of the 
future, representing that vision with a seedling composed of 
words and images.
What can chaotic music do for 
your mind?
23
EDITORS NOTE
e 2020s was a fascinating decade in Earth's history. 
Revelations about the spiritual bankruptcy of 
technology, coupled with ecological and sociological 
tumult, led to a time of deep collective soul searching, 
and consequently, renewal. No place was this more 
evident than the MIT Media Lab, a techno-utopian 
citadel of human-machine symbiosis. e early years of 
this decade were not kind to the Media Lab. Myopic 
thinking, scandal, and economic decline meant that it 
could no longer ride on its own coat tails of prestige and 
provocation. Instead, it used this period to radically 
reinvent itself, charting a new course for a future where 
humans could live in harmony with nature. 
An emerging body of historical evidence suggests that 
the Media Lab was at the epicenter of the broader 
solarpunk shift of the 2020’s. We all know that this 
rapid time of societal transition 100 years ago was a 
huge inﬂection point for Earth culture: the 
commitments made that decade to ecological 
sustainability, ethical methodologies for space 
exploration, and geodesic architecture rippled through 
the rest of the century, and perhaps even made e 
Growing possible. rough the lens of archeological 
resurveillance, this volume traces the early solarpunk 
transformation of the Media Lab, from the nascent 
seeds planted at a party in the early 2020’s to its 
culmination with the establishment of Media Lab Mars 
in 2050. ese varied accounts oﬀer historical lessons 
and insight of how techno-utopianists from antiquity 
grappled with a rapidly changing environment.
mycelial network  online
THE ANNALS OF 
FUTURE ARCHEOLOGY 
15
21
Figure 3: Cover and four select pages from the Seedvault zine. Written in the style of speculative ﬁction, the zine takes place
in the year 2121, recounting an event that took place 100 years ago and how the previous 100 years unfolded from there.
and many participants noted the image gave them ideas for
ways to implement their vision. However, we often found
that it was the unexpected differences between the prompt
and the generated image’s interpretation of it that yielded
new insight for and excitement from participants. This sug-
gests that it was the high-variance, low-ﬁdelity behavior of
VQGAN+CLIP that yielded these unexpected and whimsi-
cal differences, which in turn induced novel and creative in-
sights. This ﬁnding has important implications for the de-
sign of image synthesis systems for computational creativ-
ity. As new systems become increasingly realistic (such as
new models like DALL-E 2 (Ramesh et al., 2022)), there
is a danger that this increased ﬁdelity will come at the cost
of these unexpected quirks that we found actually sparked
positive lateral thinking in our participants.
By offering a low-friction and provocative new way to
integrate visual storytelling with community engagement,
text-to-image models with collaboratively sourced prompts
have an opportunity for cultural and organizational impact.
This approach could be used in contexts as diverse as craft-
ing organization mission statements, co-designing commu-
nity interventions, and facilitating a mediation process.
There are, however, dangers to such an approach. For one,
AI-generated images are bounded by training data, which
inherits historical biases and cultural practices (Ganimals
Blog, 2020; Crawford and Paglen, 2019). Therefore uncriti-
cally relying on model outputs as an “oracle” may entrench
users in existing inequities and stereotypes, rather than free-
ing them to envision radical new possibilities. Relatedly, if
such an approach becomes commonplace, there is the risk
that such visualization strategies could be a crutch if used
too much, with users becoming overly reliant on a machine’s
vision of the future rather than their own. Finally, there is the
risk that anthropomorphizing the AI can undermine human
credit and responsibility (Epstein et al., 2020b).
It is also important to reﬂect on the notion of “utopias,”
which we used to frame this collaborative speculation. Lit-
erally meaning “no place” in the original Greek, utopias rep-
resent idealized non-existent or impossible societies. Rarely
in utopian thinking are questions like “A utopia for whom?”
or “A utopia at what cost?” considered, which in turn leads
to imagined futures that are culturally homogeneous and can
perpetuate existing inequities. Furthermore, the very con-
cept of utopias imagines a future society different from and
evolved upon the current one, a notion rooted in endless
growth, a potentially colonial and capitalistic value (Morri-
son, 2017). Rather than envisioning radical new alternatives
to be manifested, many indigenous cultures instead hold a
worldview that humans are a part of a complex web of eco-
logical relationships that can exist an a perpetual steady-
state equilibrium (Kimmerer, 2013; Sepie, 2017).
In the
prompts we received, we saw varied interpretations of and
priorities for utopias: some participants longed for a re-
turn to local economies or traditional medicine, while oth-
ers dreamt of futuristic space suits and wind turbines. Fi-
nally, it is important to note that utopias are but one frame
for imaginative idea visualization. While we used the idea
of utopia to foster brainstorming about the future, we believe
the paradigm could instead focus inward for any community
or space looking to collaboratively speculate about its future.
Our work has several limitations which open up exciting
possibilities for future work. For one, we focused on one
particular community – the MIT Media Lab, a technology-
focused research institution embedded in a university. Fu-
ture work could explore how this approach works for other
communities with distinct cultures and practices, and how
the effectiveness of the approach varies across community
contexts. In addition, we relied on analog media throughout
the process: from handwritten prompts by participants and
a paper zine distributed in person to us showing participants
generated images asynchronously in the evaluation phase.
Future work could explore digital versions of these meth-
ods, such as an online interface for collaborative prompt
generation, an online gallery for the prompts and their cor-
responding images, or real-time dialogue with a generative
model. We also did not include in-depth explanation for how
the generative model worked. Future work should consider
more explicitly users’ understanding of the involved tech-
nology, as well as consider other types of models, such as
physically-informed models of climate futures (L¨utjens et
al., 2021b,a) or those that integrate across larger, more com-
plex systems (Lavin et al., 2021). Finally, there is the possi-
bility of using this method in diverse settings. We hope that
this approach could be applied to other community contexts,
whether it be designs for a local community garden or bold
new tactics to ﬁght the global climate emergency.
Acknowledgements
We thank Eyal Perry, Micah Epstein, Amy Smith, Simon
Colton, Rubez Chong, Oc´eane Boulais, Maggie Hughes,
Valdemar Danry and Tobin South for helpful feedback, com-
ments and support. We thank all participants for their time.
Author Contributions
ZE, HS, and DN conceptualized the project. HS conducted
the user interviews. ZE and HS wrote the paper, with input
from DN.
References
Berns, S., and Colton, S. 2020. Bridging generative deep
learning and computational creativity. In ICCC, 406–409.
Colton, S.; Smith, A.; Berns, S.; Murdock, R.; and Cook,
M. 2021. Generative search engines: Initial experiments.
In ICCC.
Compton, K., and Mateas, M. 2015. Casual creators. In
ICCC, 228–235.
Crawford, K., and Paglen, T. 2019. Excavating ai: The
politics of images in machine learning training sets. AI
and Society.
Dunne, A., and Raby, F. 2013. Speculative everything: de-
sign, ﬁction, and social dreaming. MIT press.
Epstein, Z.; Boulais, O.; Gordon, S.; and Groh, M. 2020a.
Interpolating gans to scaffold autotelic creativity. Inter-
national Conference on Computational Creativity Causal
Creator Workshop.
Epstein, Z.; Levine, S.; Rand, D. G.; and Rahwan, I.
2020b. Who gets credit for ai-generated art?
Iscience
23(9):101515.
Ganimals Blog. 2020. Beware the training data: The bar-
racuda effect. ganimals.media.mit.edu.
Kimmerer, R. 2013. Braiding sweetgrass: Indigenous wis-
dom, scientiﬁc knowledge and the teachings of plants.
Milkweed editions.
Lavin, A.; Gilligan-Lee, C. M.; Visnjic, A.; Ganju, S.;
Newman, D.; Ganguly, S.; Lange, D.; Baydin, A. G.;
Sharma, A.; Gibson, A.; et al. 2021. Technology readi-
ness levels for machine learning systems. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2101.03989.
L¨utjens, B.; Crawford, C. H.; Veillette, M.; and Newman,
D. 2021a. Pce-pinns: Physics-informed neural networks
for uncertainty propagation in ocean modeling.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:2105.02939.
L¨utjens, B.; Leshchinskiy, B.; Requena-Mesa, C.; Chishtie,
F.; D´ıaz-Rodr´ıguez, N.; Boulais, O.; Sankaranarayanan,
A.; Pi˜na, A.; Gal, Y.; Ra¨ıssi, C.; et al. 2021b. Physically-
consistent generative adversarial networks for coastal
ﬂood visualization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.04785.
Morrison, M. I. 2017. Decolonizing Utopia: Indigenous
Knowledge and Dystopian Speculative Fiction. Univer-
sity of California, Riverside.
P´erez y P´erez, R., and Ackerman, M.
2020.
Towards a
methodology for ﬁeld work in computational creativity.
New Generation Computing 38(4):713–737.
Radford, A.; Kim, J. W.; Hallacy, C.; Ramesh, A.; Goh, G.;
Agarwal, S.; Sastry, G.; Askell, A.; Mishkin, P.; Clark,
J.; et al. 2021. Learning transferable visual models from
natural language supervision. In International Conference
on Machine Learning, 8748–8763. PMLR.
Rafner, J.; Hjorth, A.; Risi, S.; Philipsen, L.; Dumas, C.;
Biskjær, M. M.; Noy, L.; Tyl´en, K.; Bergenholtz, C.;
Lynch, J.; et al. 2020. crea. blender: A neural network-
based image generation game to assess creativity.
In
Extended Abstracts of the 2020 Annual Symposium on
Computer-Human Interaction in Play, 340–344.
Rafner, J.;
Langsford, S.;
Hjorth, A.;
Gajdacz, M.;
Philipsen, L.; Risi, S.; Simon, J.; and Sherson, J. 2021.
Utopian or dystopian?: using a ml-assisted image gener-
ation game to empower the general public to envision the
future. In Creativity and Cognition, 1–5.
Ramesh, A.; Dhariwal, P.; Nichol, A.; Chu, C.; and Chen,
M. 2022. Hierarchical text-conditional image generation
with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125.
Salda˜na, J. 2013. The coding manual for qualitative re-
searchers. SAGE.
Sepie, A. J. 2017. More than stories, more than myths:
Animal/human/nature (s) in traditional ecological world-
views. Humanities 6(4):78.
